将来临的日子

Days to come

如果您能记得

If you can remember

无比闪耀的我们

Us, shining so brightly

请您告诉我

Please tell me

我会如影随形

I will be with you like a shadow

引导那些光辉

To guide that brilliance




【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律

[Scripture Information] Taisho Revised Tripitaka Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12
[Version Record] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

#【Editing Instructions】This database was edited by the Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo".




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供

[Original Data] Provided by the Virtuous Xiaozhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gayasan Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain virtuous person in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchan with new punctuation



#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

#【Other Matters】This database can be freely circulated, for detailed information please refer to [Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration]




inly, please provide the text you need translated


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十三
Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll Twenty-Three




東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translated by the Buddhist monks Buddhabhadra and Faxian during the Eastern Jin dynasty.




d
成化五年四月八日，晴。

April 8th, the fifth year of Chenghua, sunny.

以前明本、元禮部刻。

Previously printed by the Ming edition and the Yuan Ministry of Rites.

參考《歷代詩集》編注。

Referenced in the "Anthology of Poems through the Ages".

橋溪隱者題。

Inscribed by the Recluse of Qiaoxi.




世尊成道五年，
In the fifth year after the Enlightenment of the World-Honored One,

比丘僧悉清淨，
the monk community was entirely pure,

自是已後漸漸為非，
thereafter gradually committing offenses,

世尊隨事為制戒，
the World-Honored One established precepts as circumstances arose,

立說波羅提木叉四種具足法：
proclaiming the four complete precepts of the Pratimoksha:

自具足、
complete by oneself,

善來具足、
complete upon goodwill arrival,

十眾具足、
complete with ten member assembly,

五眾具足。
complete with five member assembly.




自具足者，世尊在菩提樹下，最後心廓然大悟，自覺妙證善具足，如線經中廣說，是名自具足。
He who is self-sufficient, the Blessed One under the Bodhi tree, finally achieved great enlightenment, realizing profound enlightenment and perfect fulfillment, as extensively described in the scriptures, is called self-sufficient.




善來具足者，佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園，佛告諸比丘：「如來處處度人，比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷，汝等亦當効如來廣行度人。」

The Blessed One was staying at Bamboo Grove, in the squirrels' feeding ground, where he addressed the monks: "Tathagata liberates people everywhere—monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. You should also diligently follow Tathagata's example to liberate others."

爾時諸比丘聞世尊教已遊行諸國，見有信善男子求出家者，諸比丘亦斆如來喚：「善來比丘。」度人出家。

Then, the monks, having heard the Blessed One's instructions, traveled through various countries. When they encountered faithful men seeking ordination, the monks would invite them to become monks as Tathagata did, saying: "Welcome, monk."

威儀進止，左右顧視，著衣持鉢，皆不如法，為世人所譏，作是言：「世尊所度善來比丘，威儀進止，左右顧視，著衣持鉢，皆悉如法。

Their deportment, movements, glances left and right, and wearing of robes and carrying of bowls were not according to the law, which was criticized by the people, who would say: "The Blessed One's disciples, the 'Welcome, monk', are all proper in demeanor.

諸比丘所度，亦名善來，威儀進止，左右顧視，著衣持鉢，皆不如法。」

Those ordained by the monks, also called 'Welcome, monk', were not proper in deportment, movements, and the wearing of robes and holding of bowls."

爾時尊者舍利弗聞是語已，在閑靜處加趺而坐作是思惟：「俱是善來，何故世尊所度善來比丘，皆悉如法；

Hearing this, the venerable Sariputta sat in a quiet place and thought: "Why is it that the 'Welcome, monk' ordained by the Blessed One are all proper, while those ordained by the monks are not?

諸比丘所度善來比丘，皆不如法？云何令諸比丘度人善受具足，皆悉如法，共一戒、一竟、一住、一食、一學、一說。」

How should the monks ordain people so they are all proper, sharing one rule, one session, one stay, one meal, one study, and one discourse?"

舍利弗晡時從禪覺已往詣佛所，頭面禮足，却坐一面，白佛言：「世尊！我向靜處作是思惟：『俱名善來，何故世尊所度皆悉如法；

In the afternoon, Sariputta, having emerged from meditation, went to the Blessed One, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's feet, and sat to one side. He said: "Blessed One, while in a quiet place, I reflected on how those called 'Welcome, monk' ordained by the Blessed One are all proper.

諸比丘所度皆不如法？云何使諸比丘度人善受具足，皆悉如法，共一戒、一竟、一住、一食、一學、一說。』唯願世尊具為解說。」

Those ordained by the monks are not proper. How can we make it so that those ordained by the monks are all proper, sharing the same rule, session, residence, meal, study, and discourse? I request the Blessed One to elaborate."

佛告舍利弗：「如來所度阿若憍陳如等五人，善來出家善受具足，共一戒、一竟、一住、一食、一學、一說，

The Buddha told Sariputta: "Those first five disciples ordained by Tathagata—Ajñāta Kaundinya and others—strongly adhered to proper conduct, sharing one rule, session, residence, meal, study, and discourse.

次度滿慈子等三十人，次度波羅奈城善勝子，次度優樓頻螺迦葉五百人，次度那提迦葉三百人，次度伽耶迦葉二百人，

Following them were the thirty led by Vatsapuja Mallika, then the young men from Varanasi, the 500 of Uruvela-Kassapa, 300 of Nadi-Kassapa, and 200 of Gaya-Kassapa.

次度優波斯那等二百五十人，次度汝、大目連各二百五十人，次度摩訶迦葉、闡陀、迦留陀夷、優波離，次度釋種子五百人，

Then came 250 around Upasena, you and Maudgalyayana, also 250 each, and later Mahakasyapa, Chandaka, Kanakalika, Upali, and others. Finally, there were the 500 young Shakya nobles.

次度跋度帝五百人，次度群賊五百人，次度長者子善來。

Also, 500 followers of Prajapati, and 500 marauders, and lastly the nobleman's son, Śrīgandha.

如是等如來所度善來比丘，出家善受具足，共一戒、一竟、一住、一食、一學、一說。

These 'Welcome, monk' ordained by Tathagata, all follow proper conduct, sharing same rule, session, residence, meal, study, and discourse.

舍利弗！諸比丘所可度人，亦名善來，出家善受具足，乃至共一說，是名善來受具足十眾受具足者。」

Sariputta, when the monks ordain someone, they also become 'Welcome, monk', fully equipped and proper, even through their shared discourse, which amounts to tenfold aspects of proper ordination."

佛告舍利弗：「從今日制受具足法，十眾和合、一白三羯磨無遮法，是名善受具足。」

The Buddha told Sariputta: "From today, initiate the full ordination procedure with tenfold harmony, unanimous acknowledgment by a declaration and three servings of admonition as the proper standard.

欲受具足人初入僧中，一一頭面禮僧足已，先求和上。偏袒右肩，胡跪接足，作是言：「我從尊乞求和上，尊為我作和上，與我受具足。」如是至三。

A person wishing for full ordination enters the assembly, bows at the monks' feet one by one, and seeks a mentor. Uncovering his right shoulder, kneeling, he says: "I seek ordination from the venerable one, please be my mentor." Repeat this three times.

和上應語：「發喜心。」答言：「我頂戴持。」

The mentor should respond: "Develop a joyful mind." Answer: "I accept with respect."

和上先已與求衣鉢、與求眾、與求戒師、與求空靜處教師，推與眾僧。

The mentor first provides the aspirant with robes and bowl, introduces him to the community, and appoints him to a teacher of discipline and one with seclusion experience.

羯磨師應問：「誰與某甲空靜處作教師。」答言：「我能。」

The master of ceremonies should ask: "Who will be the teacher in secluded practice?" Answer: "I can."

羯磨師應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲從某甲受具足，若僧時到，僧某甲、和上某甲、某甲能空靜處作教師。

The master of ceremonies should announce: "Venerables, please listen! Such-and-such person is receiving full ordination. If now is the time, then mentor so-and-so and myself will provide teachings in seclusion.

諸大德聽！某甲、和上某甲、某甲能空靜處作教師，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Venerables, listen! This person and mentor so-and-so will be taught in seclusion. As the Sangha is in silent consent, so it should be carried out."

教師應將離眾不近不遠。教有二種：若略、若廣。云何略？今僧中當問：「汝有者言有、無者言無。」

The teacher should guide the disciple neither too close nor too far from the assembly. Instruction is of two kinds: brief or detailed. What is brief? Presently, the monk should ask: "If you have, say you have; if not, say you have not."

云何廣？如後僧中一一說。教師來入僧中，白言：「某甲問已訖，自說清淨無遮法。」

What is detailed? State it within the assembly one by one. When the teacher enters the assembly, he should declare: "Such-and-such person has been questioned and claims purity without obstruction."

羯磨師應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲從某甲受具足，某甲已空靜處教問訖。若僧時到，僧某甲和上某甲，某甲聽入僧中。

The master of ceremonies should announce: "Venerables, listen! Such-and-such is receiving full ordination, having been instructed in stillness. If now is the time, then mentor so-and-so and myself permit this person to enter the assembly.

諸大德聽！某甲、和上某甲、某甲聽入僧中，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Venerables, listen! This person and mentor so-and-so are permitted to join the assembly. As the Sangha is in silent assent, it should be done."

欲受戒人應入僧中，一一頭面禮僧足已，在戒師前，胡跪合掌，授與衣鉢，教受，作是言：「此是我鉢多羅，應量受用，乞食器，今受持。」如是三說。

A person wishing to take precepts should enter the assembly, reverently bow at each monk's feet, and kneel before the precept master. Receive robe and bowl, with instructions, saying: "This is my Patra, properly used for receiving alms, now received." Repeat this three times.

「此是僧伽梨、此是欝多羅僧、此是安陀會，此是我三衣，此三衣不離宿受持。」如是三說。

"This is the Sanghati, this the Uttarasangha, this the Antarvasa; these are my three robes, to be kept and used, never without." Repeat this three times.

羯磨師應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲從某甲受具足，某甲已空靜處教問訖。若僧時到，僧某甲、和上某甲，某甲欲從僧乞受具足。

The master of ceremonies should announce: "Venerables, please listen! Such-and-such is receiving full ordination, having completed instruction in seclusion. If now is the time, this person and mentor are seeking full ordination from the Sangha.

諸大德聽！某甲、和上某甲，某甲欲從僧乞受具足，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Venerables, listen! This person and mentor seek ordination from the Sangha. Deliberate silently, so let it be accepted."

戒師應教乞作是言：「大德僧聽！我某甲從和上某甲受具足，阿闍梨某甲已空靜處教問訖。

The precept teacher should instruct the aspirant to beg for ordination, saying: "Venerables, I, so-and-so, am receiving full ordination from mentor so-and-so, having been questioned by the master in solitude.

我某甲、和上某甲，今從僧乞受具足，唯願僧與我受具足，哀愍我故！」如是至三。

I, and mentor so-and-so, now seek full ordination from the Sangha. I implore the Sangha to grant me full ordination out of compassion." Repeat three times.

羯磨師應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲從某甲受具足，某甲已空靜處教問訖，已從僧中乞受具足。

The master of ceremonies should announce: "Venerables, please listen! Such-and-such is receiving full ordination, having been questioned in seclusion, and has already begged the Sangha for full ordination.

若僧時到，僧某甲，和上某甲，某甲欲於僧中問遮法。

If now is the time, this person and mentor so-and-so wish to inquire into the precept protocol within the Sangha.

諸大德聽！某甲，和上某甲，某甲欲於僧中問遮法，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Venerables, listen! Such-and-such and mentor wish to raise the protocol inquiry within the Sangha, with silent assent, it should be upheld."

「善男子聽！今是至誠時，是實語時，於諸天、世間、天魔、諸梵、沙門、婆羅門、諸天、世人、阿修羅。

"Good man, hear now! This is the time for sincerity, the time for truthful speech among celestial beings, worldly beings, divine Mara, Brahma, renunciates, brahmins, humans, and Asuras.

若不實者，便於中欺誑，亦復於如來、應供、正遍知聲聞眾中欺誑，此是大罪。

If you utter falsehood, you deceive thus among beings here and also within the assembly of noble ones, led by the Tathagata—this is a grave offense.

今僧中問汝，有者言有，無者言無。父母聽不？求和上未？

Now the Sangha asks: If you have, say so; if not, say so. Have you obtained parental permission? Have you sought a mentor?

三衣鉢具不？是男子不？年滿二十不？非是非人不？

Do you have the three robes and bowl prepared? Are you male? Have you reached the age of twenty? Are you not a non-human being?

非是不能男不？汝字何等？」

Are you not emasculated? What's your name?"

若言：「字某。」「和上字誰？」

If you say: "My name is so-and-so." "Who is your mentor named?"

答言：「字某。」

Answer: "Named so-and-so."

「不壞比丘尼淨行不？非賊盜住不？非越濟人不？非自出家不？

"Have you not violated celibacy of a nun? Not lived in thievery? Not acted unlawfully across borders? Did not ordain oneself?

不殺父母不？不殺阿羅漢不？不破僧不？不惡心出佛身血不(佛久已般泥洹故依舊文)？

Not killed parent or an Arhat? Not caused division in the Sangha? Not maliciously shed the Buddha's blood (since the Buddha's long passed to parinirvana, this remains textual)?

汝本曾受具足不？」答言：「曾受。」

Did you ever receive full ordination?" Specifically: "Received before?"

「不犯四事不？」若言：「犯。」

"Do you not transgress in four matters?" If they say: "Transgressed."

應語：「去！不得受具足。」

Say: "Depart! You cannot receive ordination."

若言：「不犯。」次問十三事。「一一事中有犯不？」

If says: "No transgression." Further ask thirteen matters. "In each matter, have transgressed?"

若言：「犯。」「受具足訖，此罪能如法作不？」

If states: "Transgressed." "After complete ordination, can one resolve this properly?"

答言：「能。」

Answer: "Able."

「本捨戒不？」答言：「捨。」

"Did you give up precepts before?" Answer: "Gave up."

「汝非奴不？非養兒不？不負人債不？非王臣不？不陰謀王家不？

"Are you not a slave? Not raising children? No debts? Not a royal servant? Not conspiring against the royal house?

汝黃門不？汝非二根不？汝是丈夫不？

Are you not a eunuch? Not having both organs? Are you firmly male?

汝無如是諸病：癬疥、黃爛、癩病、癰痤、痔病、不禁、黃病、瘧病、欬嗽、消盡、癲狂、熱病、風腫、水腫、腹腫，

You have no such illnesses: scabies, yellow wound, leprosy, ulcers, hemorrhoids, difficulty controlling oneself, jaundice, malaria, cough, weakness, madness, fever, inflammation, water retention, abdominal swelling,

如是種種更有餘病著身不？」答言：「無。」

or any further diseases afflicting the body?" Answer: "None."

羯磨師應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲從某甲受具足，某甲已空靜處教問訖，已從僧中乞受具足，父母已聽，

The master of ceremonies should say: "Venerables, listen! Such-and-such receives full ordination from such-and-such, has been instructed in secluded place, has begged the Sangha for ordination, and parental permission is granted.

已求和上，三衣鉢具，是男子，年滿二十，自說清淨無遮法。

Has acquired a mentor, prepared the three robes and bowl, is male and over twenty, and professes pure uninhibited truth.

若僧時到，僧今與某甲受具足，和上某甲。如是白。」

If now is that time, then, the Sangha grants full ordination to so-and-so, with mentor so-and-so. Such is declared."

白三羯磨，乃至「僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Proclaim with threefold admonition, respecting the Sangha's silent assent, so it shall be performed.




