inly! Please provide the lines you would like me to translate


經言如是

Thus spoke the scripture

彼諸比丘聞說

The monks heard this being said

心生恐怖

Their hearts were filled with fear

即往問佛

They immediately went to ask Buddha

佛告之曰

Buddha told them

是汝等護持佛法之因緣

This is the cause for you to uphold the Buddha's Dharma

以是緣故

For this reason

當善思維

You should contemplate well

大比丘僧只

Great assembly of monks

如是一心

As with one heart




#【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

# [Version History] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

[Editing Instructions] This database was edited by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō."




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，

[Original Data] Provided by Mr. Xiao Zhenguo,

伽耶山基金會提供，

Provided by the Jiaye Mountain Foundation,

北美某大德提供，

Provided by a certain great virtue in North America,

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchane with new punctuation.




其他事項

Other matters

本資料庫可自由免費流通

This database can be freely circulated without charge

詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

For detailed content, please refer to the "Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration"




orry, but it seems that you haven't provided the lines that you want translated. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you


東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translated by the Tripitaka Master Buddhayaśas and Faxian from Eastern Jin India




明單提九十二事法之四  
Ming single mention of the ninety-two matters law - Part Four




人間遊行。
The Buddha was traveling among the people in Kosambi.

爾時世尊初夜為諸聲聞說法，
At that time, the Blessed One was teaching the Dharma to the hearers in the early night,

說法已是諸比丘各各還住房。
and after teaching the Dharma, the monks each returned to their rooms.

時六群比丘於餘處談話，經久乃還，
Then, a group of six monks were chatting in another place and returned late,

扣房戶，房內人問言：「誰？」
knocked on the door, and the person inside asked, "Who is it?"

答言：「我是六群比丘，欲此間宿。」
They replied, "We are the group of six monks and wish to stay here."

房內比丘言：「此房已滿。」
The monk inside said, "This room is already full."

六群比丘復更軟語苦求：「與我少許，容一坐處。」
The group of six monks pleaded gently, "Please make a little space for us to sit."

如是苦求不得，復至餘房亦復不得。
Despite their pleas, they could not get permission, and neither could they in other rooms.

復到諸下座比丘宿處、若溫室、若禪坊、若講堂扣戶，
Then, they went to the junior monks' quarters, whether a warm room, meditation hall, or lecture hall, and knocked on the doors,

堂內比丘問：「誰？」
and the monk inside asked, "Who is it?"

六群比丘言：「我欲來此宿。」
The group of six monks said, "We wish to stay here."

堂內比丘言：「此堂已滿。」
The monk inside said, "This hall is already full."

六群比丘復重苦求不止，
The group of six monks continued pleading tirelessly,

堂內比丘即為開戶，得入房已趣縱橫身床上而臥，
and the monk inside finally opened the door. Once inside, they sprawled across the bed and lay down,

或以手肘膝扠築邊人，
sometimes elbowing or kneeing the people beside them,

又作是言：「諸長老作一色去。」
and they said, "Elders, please make some space."

作是語已即吹燈滅，
Having said this, they blew out the light,

更喚外伴比丘言：「諸梵行人可來入。」
and called to their companions outside, "Fellow practitioners, come in."

來入已，在前者膝頭蹴，
Once they had entered, those in front kicked with their knees,

在後者肘頭築，放氣調戲。
those in the back elbowed, and they jokingly expelled air.

諸比丘作是念：「誰能共此非威儀人共在一處？」
The monks thought, "Who can stay together with these people lacking discipline?"

即持尼師壇出去。
So they picked up their mats and left.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
The monks recounted this incident to the Blessed One,

佛言：「待我從憍薩羅行還舍衛城時更白此事，
The Buddha said, "Wait for me to return to Shravasti from Kosala before you report this matter again,

當為諸比丘制戒。」
and I will lay down a rule for the monks.


衛城，廣說如上。
Again, the Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and preached as mentioned above.

先客比丘次得六群比丘房宿，夜閉戶眠，時六群比丘協先嫌故，盜以滑埿塗戶閫上，當行處著滑埿及塼石。
First, a visiting monk received lodging in the room of the group of six monks, and at night he closed the door and slept. At that time, the group of six monks, due to previous hostility, secretly applied slippery mud on the door threshold, placing slippery mud and bricks where he walked.

此比丘夜出，脚蹈滑處倒塼石上，作如是言：「諸長老！六群比丘殺我，折我頸故，作如是事欲擾亂我，誰能共此住？」
At night, the monk came out, stepped on the slippery place, and fell on the bricks, and said, "Venerable ones! The group of six monks tried to kill me, intending to break my neck, and by doing so, they want to disturb me. Who can live with this?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The monks, due to this incident, went to inform the Bhagavān, and the Buddha said, "Call the group of six monks here."

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After they came, the Buddha asked the group of six monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They replied, "It is true, Bhagavān!"

佛言：「此是惡事。」
The Buddha said, "This is an evil deed."

諸比丘白佛言：「六群比丘非但此一惡事，世尊在憍薩羅國遊行時，擾亂諸比丘，乃至各各持尼師壇出去。」
The monks told the Buddha, "The group of six monks not only committed this one evil deed, but when the Bhagavān was traveling in the country of Kosala, they disturbed the monks, even going so far as to take their kaparibandhas outside."

佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the group of six monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「汝云何知他先敷置，後來擾亂欲使他去？此是惡事，非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha said, "How could you know that he had prepared first and later wanted to disturb him to make him leave? This is an evil deed, against the Dharma, against the Vinaya, not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings, and it cannot nurture wholesome practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Let all those who reside in the city of Śrāvastī gather, and for the benefit of ten reasons, I promulgate a rule for the monks so that even those who have heard it before should hear it again."

若比丘知他比丘先敷置床褥，後來欲擾亂故敷置，作是念：「不樂者自當出去。」
If a monk knows that another monk has already prepared his bedding, and later wants to disturb him by preparing his own, thinking, "The one who is displeased will have to leave."

作如是因緣不異者，波夜提。
Committing such an act with no difference in intention leads to an offense of entanglement (pārājika)


比丘者，如上說。
Monks, as stated above.




智者从不假装知道

The wise never pretend to know.

愚者自认为无所不知

Fools think they know everything.




先敷者，是初敷也。
The first time applying, is the initial application.




床褥者，如前說。
As for the bedding, it is as previously mentioned.




後來敷置者，

Later, the one who made arrangements,

欲擾亂使他出故。

wanted to stir up trouble to make him leave.




作如是因緣不異者，波夜提。
If there are no differences in conditions and causes, it is called Pārājika.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pārājika, as stated above.




若住處少，一比丘當一柱間敷床褥尼師壇，覆上已向和上、阿闍梨，或禮拜問訊、或受誦去。
If there is little living space, a monk should spread bedding within one column space and, after covering it, approach the teacher or visiting monks to pay respects, inquire, or recite and then leave.

後比丘來却先尼師壇，自敷尼師壇，坐已作細聲唄。
Later, if another monk comes and moves the first monk's bedding, spreading his own bedding and sitting, singing softly.

先住比丘來見已作是念：「誰能斷他法？」即自持尼師壇去。
The first resident monk, upon seeing this, should think, "Who can disrupt another's practice?" and take away his own bedding.

是比丘，波夜提罪。
This monk commits a Pācittiya offense.

坐禪誦經病亦如是。
The same applies to meditating or reciting scriptures when sick.

若後來眠他床上，若是上座者應語言：「長老不知世尊制戒耶？」
If someone later sleeps on another's bed, if they are a senior, one should say, "Elder, don't you know the rules set by the Blessed One?"

若眠比丘是下座者，應呵責：「汝不善知戒相，汝不知世尊制戒，云何後來眠他床上？」
If the sleeping monk is a junior, they should be scolded: "You are not well-versed in the rules, don't you know the rules set by the Blessed One, how can you sleep on another's bed?"

若比丘在他處經行者，見先比丘來應當避去。
If a monk is practicing walking meditation in another place, upon seeing the first monk coming, they should step aside.

若比丘夜眠時雖振動䆿語，不作擾亂意，無罪。
If a monk, when sleeping at night, moves or talks in their sleep without the intention to disturb, there is no offense.

擾亂比丘，波夜提。
Disturbing a monk incurs a Pācittiya offense.

比丘尼，偷蘭遮。
For a bhikkhuni, it is a Thullaccaya offense.

式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，得越毘尼罪。
For a sikkhamana, samanera, or samaneri, it results in a breach of the training rules.

俗人，得越毘尼心悔，是故說。
For laypeople, it is a breach that leads to remorse, thus it is said.



佛住曠野精舍，有二比丘共住，上座閣下、下座閣上，上座坐禪、下座誦經。
The Buddha was residing in a wilderness hermitage where two monks lived together; the senior was below the pavilion, and the junior was above it. The senior meditated, while the junior recited scripture.

上座時到著入聚落衣持鉢，入曠野聚落乞食，疾得速還。
The senior monk would occasionally wear his village clothes and take his bowl to beg for food in the wilderness village, returning quickly.

下座方去，上座食已澡鉢舉置常處，洗足結跏趺坐。
The junior would go out while the senior, having eaten, washed his bowl and placed it in its usual spot, then washed his feet and sat cross-legged.

下座晚得食乃還，還已上重閣上置鉢常處，並作是言：「噓！」
The junior returned in the evening after obtaining food, placed his bowl in its usual spot above the pavilion, and said, "Shhh!"

極即縱身而坐，床脚下脫即傷上座頭，頭血流出。
He suddenly sat down forcefully, causing the leg of the bed to slip and injure the senior's head, from which blood flowed.

上座作如是言：「殺我！殺我！」
The senior exclaimed, "He is killing me! He is killing me!"

諸比丘聞聲已即來聚集，問：「何故如是？」
Hearing the cries, the other monks gathered and asked, "What's happened?"

上座具說其事，諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The senior explained the situation fully, and the monks reported it to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼彼比丘來。」來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha said, "Call that monk here." When he came, the Buddha asked him, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛問比丘：「汝云何閣上敷尖脚床用力坐，從今日後不聽閣上敷尖脚床坐。」
The Buddha asked the monk, "Why did you sit forcefully on the sharp-legged bed above the pavilion? From today, you are not allowed to sit on such beds above the pavilion."

佛告諸比丘：「依止曠野住者皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All who reside in the wilderness should gather. For ten benefits, I establish this rule for the monks. Those who have heard it should hear it again."

若比丘在閣屋上敷尖脚床，若坐、若臥，波夜提。
If a monk places a sharp-legged bed above a pavilion, whether sitting or lying, it is an offense.



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as stated above.




d
阁者，第二重。
The pavilion, the second level.




屋者，如世尊所聽。
The dwelling place, as heard by the World Honored One.




尖脚者，如橛。  
Those with pointed feet are like pegs.  




床者，有十四種，如上說。
As for beds, there are fourteen types, as mentioned above.




若坐若臥，波夜提。
Whether sitting or lying down, it is a burden.

波夜提者，如上說。
The burden, as mentioned above.




若以埿土作地堅牢，若板作密、若圓脚、若邊閣，閣下無人坐，皆無罪。
If the ground is made sturdy with earth, if the boards are tight, if the legs are round, or if they are on the edge of a pavilion and no one is seated below, there is no fault.

若疎作地尖脚臥床、坐床，若坐若臥者，波夜提。
If a sparsely placed pointed-leg bed or seating bed is used, whether for sitting or lying down, it incurs a Pegging offense.

若反床而坐者，得越毘尼罪。
If one sits on an overturned bed, it constitutes a Vinaya transgression.

若著橫椅，越毘尼罪。
If one places a horizontal chair, it constitutes a Vinaya transgression.

若一脚尖三脚圓，波夜提。
If one leg is pointed and three legs are round, it incurs a Pegging offense.

如是若二、若三四脚尖，波夜提。
Similarly, whether two or three or four legs are pointed, it incurs a Pegging offense.

四脚圓無罪。
All four legs being round is without fault.

是故說。
Thus it is said.




舍，時營事比丘以虫水澆草埿，為世人所譏：

The Buddha was residing in a forest monastery, and a monk responsible for maintenance sprinkled water containing insects on the ground, which led to criticism from the people.

沙門瞿曇無量方便，毀呰殺生、讚歎離殺。

The ascetic Gautama has innumerable methods, condemning killing and praising abstaining from killing.

而今沙門以虫水澆草埿，此是敗壞人，何道之有？

But now the ascetic is sprinkling the ground with water containing insects, which is destructive; what kind of path is this?

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。

When the monks heard about this, they went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼營事比丘來。」

The Buddha said, "Call the monk responsible for maintenance to come."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」

When he arrived, the Buddha asked about the matter in full: "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「此是惡事，正應為世人所嫌。

The Buddha said, "This is a wrong action, and it should indeed be criticized by people.

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。

This is not in accordance with the Dharma, the discipline, nor the Buddha's teaching, and it cannot be used to nurture good qualities.

從今日後不聽虫水澆草埿。」

From today onwards, sprinkling the ground with water containing insects is not allowed."

佛告諸比丘：「依止曠野精舍住者皆悉令集，

The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in the forest monastery should gather together,

以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

and for the ten benefits, I will lay down a rule for the monks, that even those who have heard should hear again.

若比丘知虫水，澆草埿、若使人澆，波夜提。」

If a monk knows water contains insects and either sprinkles the ground or causes someone else to do it, it is an offense of expiation."



比丘者，如上說。
Monks, as mentioned above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
The knowledgeable one knows either from his own understanding or from what others have told them.




虫者，乃至微細有命。
Insects, even the tiniest ones, have life.




水有种种，如上所述。
Water has many types, as mentioned above.




草者，茅芒等。
Grass refers to things like reeds and awns.




埿者，草埿、𦮽埿、象馬屎埿、牛屎埿等  
Mud includes grass mud, rush mud, elephant dung mud, cow dung mud, etc.




。澆者，自澆、使人澆。

The one who pours, pours by themselves and causes others to pour.

波夜提者，如上說。

As for wrongdoing, as stated above.




若比丘知水有虫，方便澆一息一，波夜提。
If a monk knows there are insects in the water, and deliberately pours one breath at a time, it is a transgression.

隨息多少，一一波夜提。
For each breath, whatever the amount, it is a transgression.

使人澆者，一方便語一波夜提。
If he instructs someone to pour it, with each instruction, it is a transgression.

若更語疾疾澆，語語波夜提。
If he further instructs them to pour quickly, each word is a transgression.

若比丘營作房舍溫室者須水，若池、若河、若井，漉取滿器，看無虫然後用。
If a monk is constructing a house or a greenhouse and needs water, he should collect it from a pool, river, or well, filter it to fill a vessel, ensure there are no insects, and then use it.

若故有虫者，當重囊漉之諦觀。
If there are still insects, he should filter it again carefully with a bag.

若故有虫者乃至三重；若故有虫者當更作井如前諦觀；若故有虫者當捨所營事至餘處去。
If there are still insects after three times; if there are still insects, he should make another well as before and carefully observe; if there are still insects, he should abandon the project and go elsewhere.

漉水法，當交竪三杖縛上頭，以漉囊繫之、以器承下，漉囊中恒停水數到著井中。
The method of filtering water is to tie three vertical sticks together at the top, attach a filtering bag to it, and place a container below to catch the filtered water, constantly straining the water again and again into the well.

虫生無常，或先無今有、或今有後無，是故比丘日日諦觀無虫便用。
The birth of insects is impermanent, sometimes not present before but appearing now or disappearing later; therefore, monks must observe daily and use water only if no insects are present.

若比丘知虫水，澆草澆埿，若自澆、教人澆，得波夜提。
If a monk knows that there are insects in the water, and he waters grass or mud himself or instructs someone else to do so, it is a transgression.

若用有虫水與和上、阿闍梨洗浴，得波夜提。
If he uses water with insects for bathing with his preceptor or teacher, it is a transgression.

若洗器水米𤄜一切漿苦酒，諸有虫者用澆草埿，得波夜提。
If he washes utensils, rice, porridge, all kinds of gruel or sour wine, and uses water with insects to pour over grass or mud, it is a transgression.

是故說。
Therefore it is said.



佛住拘睒彌，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in Kusinara, explaining broadly as above.

爾時尊者闡陀勸化作房，時闡陀集覆屋具草木竹等，
Then the Venerable Chanda encouraged others to build a room, and Chanda gathered thatch, wood, bamboo, and other materials for roofing.

辦已往語覆屋師言：「我眾事已辦，與我覆屋。」
Having completed the preparations, he went to the roofer and said, "I have prepared everything, please roof the room for me."

覆屋人言：「阿闍梨與我食直作價。」
The roofer said, "Reverend, please give me the price for food and labor."

爾時闡陀隨其價直而斷與之。
Chanda then agreed to pay the requested price.

時作人即往詣屋所，闡陀語作人：「此是覆屋具。」
The worker then went to the site, and Chanda told him, "This is the material for roofing."

覆屋人言：「覆屋有三種，厚薄不同，欲作何等覆？」
The roofer said, "There are three types of roofing, varying in thickness. Which type do you desire?"

闡陀言：「汝用問三種厚薄為？現所有草盡當用覆。」
Chanda replied, "Why ask about three types of thickness? Use all the straw available to cover it."

覆屋人言：「當有齊限，那得盡用？」
The roofer said, "There must be a limit; how can we use it all?"

如是至三。
This conversation happened thrice.

屋師復言：「一切世間皆有法限，如法限者世所稱讚。」
The roofer further said, "Everything in the world has its limits. Those who adhere to limits are praised."

闡陀言：「但盡用覆，何須多言？」
Chanda said, "Just use it all; why say more?"

師如其言盡用覆之，草多厚故繫縛不禁，
The roofer followed his words and used it all. Due to the excessive thickness of the straw, it could not be bound tightly.

始得時雨悉皆斷解，如華開敷竟夜被雨，衣鉢盡濕。
When it finally rained, everything loosened, and like a blooming flower, it was soaked overnight, wetting robes and bowls.

闡陀清旦往到屋師所作如是言：「汝云何為我覆屋乃至如是？」
In the morning, Chanda went to the roofer and said, "How did you roof it such that this happened?"

覆屋人言：「何以故？」
The roofer asked, "Why?"

闡陀言：「竟夜被雨，衣鉢盡濕。」
Chanda said, "It rained all night; everything, including clothes and bowls, is wet."

覆屋人言：「我先不語阿闍梨，覆屋有三種，厚薄不同，乃至隨語一切盡與。」
The roofer replied, "I initially told you, Reverend, that there are three types, varying in thickness, yet you said to use everything."

闡陀言：「汝當更為我覆。」
Chanda said, "Redo the roofing for me."

覆屋人言：「更與我食直作價。」
The roofer said, "Pay me again for food and labor."

闡陀言：「價直汝先已得。」
Chanda said, "You've already been paid."

屋師言：「先已得者先已作訖，若欲更作者價三倍於先。」
The roofer said, "For what's already done, pay was received. Doing it again costs three times more."

乃至闡陀自恃王力，強使更覆而不與直，
So Chanda relied on royal power, forcing the roofer to redo it without further pay.

闡陀復自遶其房苦言呵責。
Chanda then circled the room, bitterly criticizing.

時有行人，屋師語言：「諸人看是沙門釋子恃王力勢，
At that time, a passerby heard the roofer say, "See how this ascetic, a son of the Shakya, relies on royal power,

強使我作而不與直。」
forcing me to work without pay."

行人即嫌：「云何釋子恃王勢力，強使人作而不與價？甚為不可。
The passerby complained, "How can a Shakya scion misuse royal influence like this? It's unacceptable.

自遶其屋猶如盤馬，傷殺生草，此敗壞人，何道之有？」
Circling the room like a horse, damaging the grass, ruining others—is this any way?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊，
The monks reported this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼闡陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Summon Chanda."

即呼來已，佛問闡陀：「汝實爾不？」
After being called, the Buddha asked Chanda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He answered, "True."

佛告闡陀：「此是惡事，非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha told Chanda, "This is misconduct; it is neither lawful nor in accordance with the teachings. It does not nurture good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止拘睒彌住者盡悉令集，
The Buddha instructed the monks, "Gather all those residing in Kusinara.

以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
For the sake of ten benefits, establish a rule for the monks; those who've heard should hear again.

若比丘作大房施戶牖，經營齊再三覆，
If a monk builds a large room with windows and doors, taking care with repeated roofing,

當於少草地中住，若過者，波夜提。」
he should reside in a place with little grass. If exceeded, it's a pācittiya offense."



比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, it is as explained above.




作者，若自作、若使人作。
The author, whether self-written or written by others. 




大者，過量。
The bigger it is, the more it exceeds the limit.




房者，世尊所聽。  
A dwelling is what the World-Honored One permits.




作戶者，通人出入處。

Doors are created to allow people's access in and out.




窗户，是让光线进入的地方。

A window is a place where light comes in.




經營者，教語指授。
Managers, teach and instruct.




覆者，有十種：若草、若埿、若板、若石灰、若阿槃頭國覆、摩竭提國、拘睒彌國、山國、恭敬國覆、藏語國覆。

There are ten types of coverings: such as grass, mud, planks, lime, the cover of the Aparantaka country, Magadha country, Kausambi country, mountain country, reverent country cover, and Tibetan language country cover.

再三者，非五六，極齊三。

Three times over, it is not five or six, but exactly three.




少草地者，少生草處。

The place with less grass is where little grows.




波夜提者，如上說。

Bo-ye-ti is as stated above.




雇覆屋人斷價時，當如實價不得高下，

When hiring someone to cover a house, the price must be fair and not fluctuate.

應語作人言：「汝若如是知覆，當與如是價。

You should tell the person: "If you know how to cover like this, you will get this price.

若不如是知覆，不與如是價。」如是要令分明。

If you don't know how to cover like this, you won't get this price." This should be made clear.

三處分已，比丘作是念：「當作方便持草木竹往彼，

After dividing into three parts, a monk thinks: "I should cleverly carry grass, wood, and bamboo there,

彼若見我當疾好覆。」

so that when they see me, they will quickly cover it well."

屋師見已好不好，得波夜提。

Whether or not the roofer sees and covers it well, he gets a pācittiya.

如是作方便，欲使屋師見故，往禮拜和上、阿闍梨，

Acting in this way for the reason of making the roofer see, visiting elders and teachers,

受經誦讀、若經行、若入聚落，

receiving, reciting scriptures, whether walking or entering a village,

屋師見我已當疾好覆。

once the roofer sees me, he should quickly cover it well.

見已好不好，俱得波夜提。

Whether he sees and covers it well or not, he gets a pācittiya in both cases.

如是一切作方便，得波夜提。

In all cases of acting cleverly, he gets a pācittiya.

若不作方便，往見已為好疾覆，無罪。

If not acting cleverly, and he goes to see and quickly covers it well, there's no offense.

是故說。

Thus it is said.



種子及異語，
The seed and strange words,

嫌責露地敷，
Blame the exposed ground,




將粉末敷在外部，然後從內部引出來，先在多重的閣層上敷設。

Apply the powder externally, then draw it out from within, initially laying it on the multiple layers of the pavilion.




虫水作大房。
Insect water builds a large house.

第二跋渠竟。
The second channel is finally completed.




，廣說如上。
Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and explained the teachings extensively as stated above.

爾時長老比丘次第教誡比丘尼，時難陀、優波難陀不得次第教誡，自相謂言：「諸長老比丘悉次第教誡比丘尼，我等不得次第教誡，我等今當自先往教誡。」
At that time, the elder monks were instructing the nuns in order, but Nanda and Upananda did not have the chance to instruct them in order. They said to each other, "All the elder monks get to instruct the nuns in order, but we do not. So, we should go and instruct them ourselves."

即作是念：「我當依誰次第而去？當依大目揵連次第而去？彼尊者有大神力，脫不可者或捉我等遠擲他方世界。」
Then they thought, "Whose order should we follow to proceed? Should we follow the order of the Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana? The venerable one has great supernatural power and might throw us to other worlds if it is inappropriate."

當依尊者大迦葉次第而去？彼尊者有大威德，若不合理，或能在大眾中摧辱我等。
Should we follow the order of the Venerable Mahākāśyapa? The venerable one has great authority and might humiliate us in front of the assembly if it is inappropriate.

尊者舍利弗柔軟和雅，當依其次。」
The Venerable Śāriputra is gentle and amiable, so we should follow his order."

作是念已即依其次，清旦著衣往詣比丘尼精舍，作如是言：「諸姊妹和集，我等來相教誡。」
Having thought this way, they followed his order. Early in the morning, they donned their robes and went to the nunnery, saying, "Sisters, gather together, we have come to instruct you."

時諸比丘尼即集眾，彼難陀比丘多聞辯才善能說法，即為比丘尼眾隨宜說法。
At that time, the nuns gathered, and the well-learned and eloquent monk Nanda taught the nuns accordingly.

時尊者舍利弗教誡時到，著衣詣比丘尼門屋下住，聞說法聲。
When it was time for the Venerable Śāriputra to instruct, he dressed and stood under the porch of the nunnery, hearing the sound of the teaching.

時諸比丘尼遙見尊者舍利弗，以恭敬法故不起迎逆。
The nuns saw the Venerable Śāriputra from afar but did not rise to greet him out of respect for the Dharma.

時尊者舍利弗見是事已，即作是念：「我今為不斷法故即還。」
The Venerable Śāriputra, seeing this, thought to himself, "I will return without disrupting the Dharma."

往詣佛所，頭面禮足却住一面。
He went to the place of the Buddha, paid homage by bowing at his feet, and stood aside.

佛知而故問舍利弗：「汝已教誡比丘尼耶？」
The Buddha, knowing the situation, asked Śāriputra, "Have you instructed the nuns?"

答言：「不教誡。世尊！」
He replied, "I did not instruct them, World Honored One."

佛言：「何故？」
The Buddha said, "Why not?"

舍利弗以上因緣具白世尊，佛言：「呼難陀、優波難陀來。」
Śāriputra explained the reason to the World Honored One, and the Buddha said, "Call Nanda and Upananda to come."

即呼來已，佛問難陀、優波難陀：「汝實爾不？」
Having called them, the Buddha asked Nanda and Upananda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They replied, "It is true, World Honored One."

佛言：「汝云何僧不差而教誡比丘尼？此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha said, "How can you instruct the nuns without the order of the Sangha? This is not in accordance with the Dharma, not in accordance with the Vinaya, and not as the Buddha teaches. It cannot be used to cultivate virtuous Dharma."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in the city of Śrāvastī should be gathered together. For the benefit of the ten advantages, a rule will be established for the monks, even those who have heard it should hear it again."

若比丘僧不差而教誡比丘尼者，波夜提。
If a monk instructs nuns without the order of the Sangha, it is a Pācittiya offense.


比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




不差者，僧不作羯磨名不差。
An error, if the monks do not perform the act, is called an error.

十二事不成就者不名為差。
If the twelve matters are not accomplished, it is not called an accomplishment.

眾不成就、白不成就、作羯磨不成就，亦名不差。
When the group is not accomplished, the announcement is not accomplished, and the act is not accomplished, it is also called an error.




教誡者，若阿毘曇、若毘尼。
The teacher, whether Abhidharma or Vinaya.




波夜提者，如上說。
Bo Ye Tizhe, as mentioned above.




若比丘僧不差，教誡比丘尼者，波夜提，是故說。
If a monk who is not deficient teaches or admonishes a nun, it is an offense entailing a formal meeting. Therefore, it is said.




，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in Śrāvastī and expounded extensively as above.

時長老比丘次第教誡比丘尼，時尊者難陀次第教誡比丘尼，而不肯去。
At that time, the elder monks took turns instructing the nuns, and it was Venerable Nanda's turn to instruct them, but he refused to go.

爾時大愛道憍曇彌比丘尼，往至佛所頭面禮足，白佛言：「世尊！尊者難陀次應教誡比丘尼，而不肯去，誰當應去？」
At that time, the nun Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī went to the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and said, "World Honored One! It is Venerable Nanda's turn to instruct the nuns, but he refuses to go. Who should go?"

作是語已頭面禮佛足而去。
Having said this, she bowed at the Buddha's feet and left.

佛語比丘：「呼難陀來。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "Call Nanda here."

來已，佛問難陀：「汝次應教誡比丘尼，何故不去？」
When he arrived, the Buddha asked Nanda, "It's your turn to instruct the nuns. Why are you not going?"

難陀白佛言：「世尊！未被僧羯磨，是以不去。」
Nanda replied to the Buddha, "World Honored One! I have not been sanctioned by the Sangha and that is why I did not go."

佛語諸比丘：「有十二事成就，僧當拜作教誡比丘尼人。何等十二？」
The Buddha said to the monks, "There are twelve things to be fulfilled for someone to be chosen by the Sangha to instruct the nuns. What are these twelve?"

一、持戒清淨；二、多聞阿毘曇；三、多聞毘尼；四、學戒；五、學定；六、學慧；
1. Be pure in observing precepts; 2. Be learned in the Abhidharma; 3. Be learned in the Vinaya; 4. Have learned the precepts; 5. Have learned concentration; 6. Have learned wisdom;

七、能為人除惡邪；八、能自毘尼能毘尼他；九、有辭辯；十、不污梵行；
7. Be capable of removing evil and wrong from others; 8. Can discipline oneself and discipline others; 9. Be articulate in speech; 10. Remain untainted in the path of Brahmacharya;

十一、不壞比丘尼重禁；十二、二十臘、若過二十臘。是為十二法。」
11. Do not violate the heavy prohibitions of the nuns; 12. Have been ordained for twenty years or more. These are the twelve laws."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！尊者難陀十二法成就，若僧時到，僧拜難陀作教誡比丘尼人。如是白。」
The person conducting the formal act should say: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! Venerable Nanda has fulfilled the twelve laws. When the time is right for the Sangha, we appoint Nanda to instruct the nuns. Thus is the statement."

「大德僧聽！尊者難陀十二法成就，僧今差難陀教誡比丘尼。諸大德忍難陀教誡比丘尼者默然，若不忍者便說。」
"Venerable Sangha, please listen! Venerable Nanda has fulfilled the twelve laws. The Sangha now appoints Nanda to instruct the nuns. Anyone who agrees, please remain silent, those who disagree, please speak."

「僧已忍差難陀教誡比丘尼竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha agrees to appoint Nanda to instruct the nuns as there is silent consent, thus the matter is upheld."

爾時尊者難陀為諸比丘尼廣說法，遂至日沒。
At that time, Venerable Nanda extensively expounded the Dharma to the nuns and continued until sunset.

諸比丘尼逼暮還入城，為世人所嫌，作是言：「沙門釋子將是比丘尼竟日自娛樂，日沒乃還，女人可愍不得自在。
The nuns returned to the city at dusk and were criticized by people saying, "The followers of Śākyamuni keep the nuns engaged all day for their own amusement, and only return at sunset. These poor women have no freedom.

乃至如是此壞敗人，何道之有？」
How can this corrupt behavior lead to any path?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼難陀來。」
The monks heard this and reported the cause and conditions to the World Honored One. The Buddha said, "Call Nanda here."

來已，佛問難陀：「汝實爾不？」
When he arrived, the Buddha asked Nanda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛語難陀：「此是惡事，非法、非律、非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha said to Nanda, "This is unwholesome, not in accordance with the Dharma, nor the Vinaya, nor my teachings. It cannot nurture good Dharma."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all those residing near Śrāvastī to receive the ten benefits. A precept will be established for the monks, and even those who have already heard it should hear it again."

若比丘僧差教誡比丘尼，從日沒乃至明相未出者，波夜提。
If a monk appointed by the Sangha to instruct nuns continues from sunset until the next light has appeared, it is a pācittiya offense.



比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, as stated above.




僧差者，十二法成就，眾成就、白成就、羯磨成就。
The assignment of monks involves fulfillment in twelve dharmas: fulfillment in the congregation, fulfillment in white (purity), fulfillment in Karmavachana (ritual procedures).




教誡者

Preachers

若阿毘曇

Whether Abhidharma

若毘尼

or Vinaya.




冥者，從日沒至明相未出，波夜提。
Darkness is from sunset until the light has not yet emerged. Buddha's night.




波夜提者，如上說。
Boya Te, as mentioned above.




日沒作未沒想教誡者，越毘尼。
Meaning: If one instructs after sunset with the thought that it is not yet sunset, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

日未沒作沒想，得越毘尼。
Meaning: If one thinks it is sunset when it is not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

日沒作沒想，波夜提。
Meaning: If one thinks it is sunset when it is, it is a minor offense.

日未沒作未沒想，無罪。
Meaning: If it is not sunset and one thinks it is not, there is no offense.

明相四句亦如是。
Meaning: The same applies to these four sentences regarding daylight.

比丘尼式叉摩尼想教誡，得波夜提。
Meaning: If a novice nun instructs with the thought that she is a bhikkhuni, it is a minor offense.

式叉摩尼作比丘尼想，得越毘尼罪。
Meaning: If a novice nun thinks she is a bhikkhuni, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

式叉摩尼作式叉摩尼想教誡，無罪。
Meaning: If a novice nun instructs with the thought of being a novice, there is no offense.

比丘尼作比丘尼想教誡，波夜提。
Meaning: If a bhikkhuni instructs with the thought of being a bhikkhuni, it is a minor offense.

沙彌尼、外道出家尼、優婆夷，四句亦如是。
Meaning: The same four sentences apply to female novices, non-Buddhist renunciates, and laywomen.

若比丘尼夜禮比丘足，比丘言：「苦盡解脫。」者，波夜提。
Meaning: If a bhikkhuni bows to a monk at night and the monk says "Freedom from suffering," it is a minor offense.

若言：「善來！」者，無罪。
Meaning: If the monk says "Welcome!" there is no offense.

若一切四部眾會竟夜說法時，比丘作方便，欲為比丘尼說《大愛道出家經》、《黑瞿曇彌經》、《法豫比丘尼經》者，得波夜提罪。
Meaning: When one of the four assemblies speaks Dharma at night, if a monk intends to explain certain sutras to a bhikkhuni, it's a minor offense.

若正誦此經更不知餘經，次第誦者無罪。
Meaning: If one recites these sutras without knowing others, reciting in order is not an offense.

若夜比丘在高座上說法時，作如是言：「一切眾坐明聽。」者，得波夜提。
Meaning: If at night a monk preaches from a high seat saying, "Everyone sit and listen," it is a minor offense.

若不作是言為說者，無罪。
Meaning: If he does not say this while teaching, there is no offense.

是故說。
Meaning: Therefore, it is preached.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining as above.

時諸長老比丘次第教誡比丘尼，時六群比丘作是念：「諸長老比丘次第教誡比丘尼，我等不得。我等當先在前去教誡比丘尼。」
At that time, the elder bhikkhus were instructing the bhikkhunis in sequence, and then the six group bhikkhus thought: "The elders are instructing the bhikkhunis in sequence, but we are not getting the chance. We should be the first to go and instruct the bhikkhunis."

有言：「世尊制戒，僧不差不得教誡比丘尼。」
Someone said, "The Buddha has laid down rules, without the Order's permission, one is not to instruct bhikkhunis."

六群比丘言：「我等知作羯磨事。」
The six group bhikkhus said, "We know how to perform the formal act."

即便出界作羯磨，展轉相拜已，即往比丘尼精舍，作如是言：「姊妹！汝等和合僧我當教誡。」
They then went out of the boundary and performed the formal act, mutually appointing one another, and then went to the bhikkhuni's monastery and said, "Sisters! Unite as a sangha, we are going to instruct you."

時六群比丘尼疾疾集。
Then the six group bhikkhunis quickly assembled.

時眾中如法者作如是言：「誰能受此非毘尼人教誡？」
At that time, someone among them who understood the law said, "Who would accept instruction from one who is not a Vinaya person?"

時六群比丘尼即自聚集，論說俗事已便去。
Then the six group bhikkhunis gathered among themselves, discussed worldly matters, and then left.

時尊者難陀到時著衣，往比丘尼精舍作如是言：「諸比丘尼盡集我當教誡。」
Then, when it was time, Venerable Nanda dressed and went to the bhikkhunis' monastery saying, "All bhikkhunis gather, I am going to instruct you."

時諸善比丘尼即和合，六群比丘尼不來，難陀問言：「比丘尼僧和合未？」
At that time, the virtuous bhikkhunis gathered, but the six group bhikkhunis did not come, and Nanda asked, "Have the bhikkhunis gathered?"

答言：「未。」
They answered, "No."

復問：「誰不來？」
He asked again, "Who has not come?"

答言：「六群比丘尼不來。」
They answered, "The six group bhikkhunis did not come."

即遣使往喚，復不來，作如是言：「我等先已從六群比丘受教誡。」
He sent a messenger to call them, but they still did not come, saying, "We have already received instruction from the six group bhikkhus."

難陀言：「尼僧不和合者不得教誡。」
Nanda said, "Without the sangha's assembly, instruction cannot be given."

言已便還，到世尊所頭面禮足却住一面。
Having said this, he returned, went to the Buddha, and after bowing down, stood at one side.

佛知而故問：「汝已教誡比丘尼耶？」
The Buddha, knowing, asked, "Did you instruct the bhikkhunis?"

難陀即以上因緣具白世尊。
Nanda explained the situation to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six group bhikkhus."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked them about the matter, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「六群比丘，汝云何僧不差而教誡比丘尼？」
The Buddha said, "Six group bhikkhus, how could you instruct bhikkhunis without the sangha's permission?"

答言：「我等已受差竟。」
They replied, "We have been appointed."

佛言：「癡人！誰差汝等？」
The Buddha said, "Foolish men! Who appointed you?"

答言：「我等出界自展轉相差。」
They answered, "We went out of the boundary and mutually appointed each other."

佛言：「從今已去，不聽界外展轉相差往比丘尼精舍。」
The Buddha said, "From now on, it is not allowed to mutually appoint each other outside the boundary to go to the bhikkhunis' monastery."



衛城，大愛道瞿曇彌病，時尊者阿難往問訊如是言：「體力何如？所患損不？不至增耶？」

Furthermore, when the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, Mahaprajapati Gotami was ill, and at that time, Venerable Ananda went to visit her and asked: "How is your strength? Is your illness reducing? Is it not increasing?"

答言：「尊者！苦患無損。善哉！尊者為我說法。」

She replied: "Venerable, my suffering is not decreasing. Venerable, please teach me the Dharma."

阿難言：「世尊制戒，不白界內比丘不得為比丘尼說法。」

Ananda said, "The Blessed One has prescribed a rule that a monk is not allowed to teach nuns without declaring it."

比丘尼言：「和南。」

The nun said, "Oh, I see."

尊者答言：「安隱住。」

The venerable replied, "Remain at ease."

作是言已便還往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面。

After saying this, he returned to the Blessed One, prostrated at His feet, and stood to one side.

佛知而故問，阿難即以上事具白世尊。

The Buddha, knowing this, asked, and Ananda reported the entire matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝若為說法者，彼病即差身得安樂。從今日後聽為病比丘尼說法。」

The Buddha said, "If you teach her the Dharma, her illness may be alleviated and she will find comfort. From this day onwards, permission is granted to teach sick nuns."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "All those residing in Shravasti should be gathered so that this rule can be given to the monks, and those who have already heard it must hear it again.

若比丘往比丘尼住處，欲教誡，不白善比丘，除餘時，波夜提。餘時者，病時。」

If a monk goes to a nunnery intending to instruct, without declaring it to a capable monk, except during specific times, it is an offense. The specific time referred to is during illness."


比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhus, as mentioned above.




教者，教詔也。
To teach is to proclaim instruction.




善比丘者

A good monk

界內現前

appears within the bounds

非眷屬現前

and is not accompanied by dependents.




不白者，若言：「我非時入聚落。」
One who does not declare may say: "I did not enter the village at an inappropriate time."

若言：「離同食。」
Or say: "I have not shared meals."

是不名為白。
This is not called a declaration.

白者，當作如是言：「長老憶念！白入比丘尼精舍教誡。」
One who declares should say thus: "Elder, remember! I declare the intention to enter the nunnery for admonishment."

彼應言：「莫放逸。」
They should say: "Do not be negligent."



除餘時，餘時者，比丘尼病時，世尊說無罪。  
Except for the remaining time, during the remaining time, the Buddha said there is no offense for a sick bhikkhuni.




波夜提者，如上說。
The term 'Bodhichitta': as previously stated.




練若住處，若一人欲入比丘尼精舍，當白第二人作是言：「長老憶念！白入比丘尼精舍教誡。」
If two people are staying in a retreat, and one of them wants to enter the nunnery, they should inform the other by saying: "Elder, please remember! I am going to the nunnery for instruction."

彼應言：「莫放逸。」答言：「頂戴受。」
The other should say, "Do not be negligent." The response should be, "I humbly accept."

若二人俱欲往者，當展轉相白。
If both wish to go, they should inform each other.

若一人已往，一人後復欲往者，當作如是念：「我若道中見比丘當白，若聚落中見者當白。」
If one has already gone and the other wishes to go afterwards, they should think, "If I see a monk on the way, I should inform; if seen in the settlement, I should inform."

若到比丘尼精舍門，不得即入，應問：「有比丘在內不？」
When reaching the gate of the nunnery, one must not enter immediately but should ask, "Is there a monk inside?"

若有，喚來出白，白已當入。
If there is, call them out to inform, and after informing, one should enter.

若不白，一脚入門，得越毘尼罪。
If not informed, entering with one foot incurs a minor violation.

若二脚入者，得波夜提。
Entering with both feet incurs a serious offense.

若比丘尼請比丘食，眾僧上座應作如是白：「入比丘尼住處教誡去。」
If a nun invites a monk for a meal, the senior among the monks should inform: "Going to the nunnery for instruction."

若第一上座不能答對者，第二上座應白。
If the first senior monk cannot respond, the second senior monk should inform.

若僧已入坐，比丘尼問事，眾中年少比丘有辯才，現前答對說法者，無罪。
If the monk is already seated and a nun asks a question, a younger monk with eloquence may respond and explain, without fault.

若比丘尼，比丘住處隔牆相接，比丘作細妙聲唄，比丘尼遙問言：「尊者！誰能作如是唄？」
If the nun's and monk's residences are adjacent, and a monk is chanting melodiously, a nun may ask from afar, "Venerable! Who is chanting so?"

答言：「我唄。」比丘尼言：「尊者能作如是好唄。」
The reply, "I am chanting." The nun says, "Venerable, you can chant so well."

比丘言：「汝欲更聞耶？」答言：「欲聞。」比丘即更唄者，波夜提罪。
The monk says, "Do you wish to hear more?" If she replies, "I wish to hear," and the monk chants more, it incurs a serious offense.

若比丘尼病，比丘為唄者，無罪。
If the nun is sick and the monk chants, it is without fault.

若此比丘尼已死，比丘尼弟子語比丘言：「師已死。」比丘應即止。
If the nun has died, and the nun's disciple tells the monk, "The master has died," the monk should stop immediately.

若為作無常唄者，得波夜提。
If the monk chants about impermanence, it incurs a serious offense.

若比丘尼禮比丘足，時比丘作如是呪願：「使汝一切苦盡得解脫。」波夜提。
If a nun worships the monk's feet, and the monk bestows a blessing like, "May all your suffering end and you achieve liberation," it incurs a serious offense.

應語言：「善來！」是故說。
One should say, "Welcome!" Thus it is said


，廣說如上。  
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

爾時六群比丘晨朝著衣，在祇洹門下住。  
At that time, six groups of monks dressed in the morning and stayed under the Jeta Grove gate.

時有教誡尼比丘出門，六群比丘見已作如是言：  
At that time, a nun went out of the gate, the six groups of monks saw her and said:

「汝等今入城得放恣諸根，不為餘事，為好飲食故去。」  
"You all now enter the city to indulge your senses, not for other matters, but for good food."

時教誡尼比丘慚愧。  
The nun was ashamed.

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。  
The monks heard this and went to report the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」即呼來。  
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here." And they were called.

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」  
When they came, the Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」  
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「此是惡事，非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」  
The Buddha said, "This is a bad deed, not according to the Dharma, not the discipline, not following the Buddha's teachings, and it cannot nurture good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all the monks residing in Shravasti. For ten benefits, I will establish precepts for the monks, even for those who have already heard, they must hear again.

若比丘語比丘言：『長老！為食故教誡比丘尼。』波夜提。」  
If a monk says to another monk, 'Venerable! For the sake of food, instruct the nuns,' it is an offense of expiation."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikshu, as mentioned above.




食者，麨、麵、飯、魚、肉。
As for food, there are cereals, noodles, rice, fish, and meat.

復次有食名色、聲、香、味、觸。
Additionally, there are sensory foods: sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touch.




佛說比丘當受持戒，遵循律儀。
The Buddha taught that monks should uphold the precepts and follow the rules of discipline.

是故我為諸比丘，廣分別開示其義。
Therefore, I elaborate and explain the meanings to all the monks.

復次者，何者是毘尼？
Furthermore, what is the Vinaya?

謂諸波羅提木叉，諸威儀，諸阿波摩沙。
It refers to the Prātimokṣa, the various conducts, and the minor transgressions.



波夜提者，如上說。
Prajnaparamita, as mentioned above.




若比丘語比丘作如是言：「今為飲食故教誡比丘尼。」者，波夜提。
If a monk says to another monk, "Now, for the sake of food, instruct a nun," it is an offense.

若言：「為醫藥故教誡比丘尼。」者，得越毘尼罪。
If he says, "Instruct the nun for the sake of medicine," it incurs a transgression.

若比丘語比丘尼作如是語：「彼比丘為飲食故教誡汝等。」得越毘尼罪。
If a monk says to a nun, "That monk instructs you for the sake of food," it incurs a transgression.

若比丘語比丘尼作如是語：「彼比丘為醫藥故教誡汝等。」得越毘尼心悔。
If a monk says to a nun, "That monk instructs you for the sake of medicine," it incurs a confession of transgression.

若比丘語比丘言：「汝為飲食故教誡式叉摩尼、沙彌尼。」得越毘尼罪。
If a monk says to another monk, "You instruct the novice and postulant for the sake of food," it incurs a transgression.

若言：「為醫藥。」者，得越毘尼心悔。
If he says, "For medicine," it incurs a confession of transgression.

如是廣說乃至優婆塞、優婆夷，為飲食故教誡汝等。得越毘尼罪。
Thus, it is broadly said up to laymen and laywomen, for the sake of food instructing you incurs a transgression.

若言：「為醫藥故教誡汝等。」得越毘尼心悔。
If he says, "Instruct you for the sake of medicine," it incurs a confession of transgression.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī and broadly spoke as above.

爾時尊者優陀夷、善生比丘尼是本二。
At that time, Venerable Udāyin and the Bhikkhuni Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā were both present.

善生比丘尼語尊者優陀夷言：「我明日當次守房，可來共語。」
Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā said to Venerable Udāyin, "Tomorrow I will be on room duty, you can come and talk."

明日諸比丘尼各各入聚落乞食，
The next day, the bhikkhunis each went into the village to beg for food,

時優陀夷往善生比丘尼所，在屏處蹲，
At that time, Udāyin went to Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā's place and squatted in a secluded spot,

相向展轉生欲心，身生起相看而住。
Facing each other, lustful thoughts arose, and they stayed observing each other's movements.

爾時有老病比丘尼，出行遇見已，心生慚愧，即便却還。
Then an elderly sick bhikkhuni came out, saw them, felt ashamed, and immediately returned.

病比丘尼即以是事向諸比丘尼說，
The sick bhikkhuni reported the matter to the other bhikkhunis,

諸比丘尼語善生比丘尼言：「汝出家人云何乃作此非法事？甚為可恥！」
The bhikkhunis said to Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā, "How can you, as a renunciant, do such an unlawful thing? It is very shameful!"

善生比丘尼即瞋恚言：「奇哉！奇哉！是我親里比丘，時時來看我，
Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā angrily replied, "Strange! Strange! He is my relative bhikkhu and often comes to see me.

若我不與共相娛樂者，誰復應爾？是我家法，有何可怪？」
If I don't entertain him, who else should? It's a family custom, what's so strange about it?"

如是諸比丘尼一一難詰，是善生比丘尼辯才能一一答。
Thus, each bhikkhuni questioned her one by one, yet Bhadda Kuṇḍalakesā skillfully replied to each.

諸比丘尼即以是事白大愛道，大愛道即白世尊。
The bhikkhunis reported this matter to Mahāprajāpati, who then reported it to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼優陀夷來。」即便呼來。
The Buddha said, "Call Udāyin here." And he was immediately summoned.

佛問優陀夷：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
The Buddha asked Udāyin, "Is it true?" He replied, "It is true."

佛言：「此是惡事。汝常不聞我無量方便，讚歎梵行、毀呰婬欲耶？
The Buddha said, "This is a bad deed. Have you not often heard me, with countless means, praise the pure life and condemn lust?

汝云何作是惡不善法？此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
How can you commit such an evil and unwholesome act? It is not lawful, not according to the discipline, not according to the Buddha's teachings, and cannot nurture virtuous conduct."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
The Buddha said to the bhikkhus, "Gather all residing in the city of Śrāvastī; for ten benefits, I impose rules on the bhikkhus,

乃至已聞者當重聞。若比丘與一比丘尼共空屏處坐者，波夜提。」
and even those who have heard should hear again. If a bhikkhu sits together in a secluded spot with a bhikkhuni, it is a pācittiya offense."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as mentioned above.




一者，一比丘、一比丘尼。
First, there is one monk and one nun.

雖有人，若狂癡、心亂、眠、非人、畜生，
Even if there are people, if they are crazy, confused, asleep, not human, or animals,

雖有如是比人，故名無人。
though such people exist, they are called no-man.



空屏者

Those who sit before empty screens

僻靜處

In secluded places




坐者，共坐。  
Those who sit, sit together.




波夜提者，如上說。

The term "Boya" is as mentioned above.




一比丘食，一比丘尼共比丘坐，一比丘尼來往益食。
If a nun invites a monk to eat, and if a nun sits together with a monk, and if a nun comes and goes to provide food.

益食比丘尼去時，比丘隨一一時得波夜提。
When the nun providing food leaves, the monk receives a punishment every time.

若比丘尼坐者，比丘爾時應起，不得默然而起，使比丘尼疑欲作非法事，應當語言：「我欲起。」
If the nun is sitting, the monk should rise at that moment and should not rise silently, causing the nun to suspect he intends an improper act, and should say, "I wish to rise."

若比丘尼問言：「何以故起？」應答言：「世尊制戒不得與比丘尼共坐。」
If the nun asks, "Why do you rise?" he should reply, "The Blessed One has instituted a rule forbidding sitting together with a nun."

若比丘尼言：「尊者但坐我當起。」比丘爾時坐者無罪。
If the nun says, "Reverend, please remain seated, I will rise," the monk at that time is without fault for remaining seated.

乃至沙彌尼，若在閣道板蹬上坐，移一一蹬上坐，比丘爾時隨一一移坐，波夜提。
Even for a novice nun, if seated on a corridor board seat, moving from step to step, the monk at that time receiving a penalty for moving seat by seat.

若沙彌尼乃至減七歲，亦犯波夜提。
If a novice nun is less than seven years old, the penalty is also incurred.

比丘與比丘尼獨屏處坐，波夜提。
A monk sitting alone in a secluded place with a nun results in a penalty.

若精舍戶向道，若行人不斷，一切如與女人說法中廣說，是罪、是覆處、非是露處，亦是夜、亦是晝，是一人、非眾多，是近非是遠，是故說。
If the monastery faces the road, if passersby are uninterrupted, all as elaborated in the rules about speaking with women, it is a fault, a covered place, not an exposed place, either night or day, with one person not many, near not far, therefore it is said.



，廣說如上。

The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, elaborating on the topics as previously stated.

爾時六群比丘，與六群比丘尼共道行，日冥欲到聚落，在池水邊止息，欲求宿處。

At that time, a group of six monks traveled with a group of six nuns. As night fell, they wished to reach a village and stopped by a pond to rest, intending to find lodging.

時比丘尼白六群比丘言：「尊者住此，我當入聚落覓宿處。」

Then, the nuns said to the group of monks, "Venerable ones, please stay here. I will enter the village to seek accommodation."

即入聚落求宿處，得主人唱從所安。

They entered the village and searched for lodging, securing a place by negotiating with the householder.

得宿處已便出迎六群比丘，白言：「尊者！我已得住處，可共入安隱。」

After securing the lodging, they went out to welcome the group of monks, saying, "Venerable ones! I have found a place for us to stay, please come and settle in."

比丘住已，白言：「尊者！我欲入村勸化明日飲食。」

Once settled, the monks said, "Venerable ones! We would like to enter the village to encourage offerings for tomorrow's meals."

到諸女人所作如是言：「比丘、比丘尼二眾梵行僧俱到，汝當辦明日食、非時漿、塗足油。」

They went to the women and said, "Both the monks and nuns have arrived, please prepare tomorrow's meal, unwarranted drinks, and foot ointment."

諸女人聞已，或有辦一人供、二人供者，如是人人悉辦供具，飲食飽滿餘者持去。

Upon hearing this, some women prepared offerings for one or two people. Thus, everyone prepared provisions, and any excess food was taken away.

在道行時並共語笑調戲，為世人所嫌：「汝看沙門釋子，皆是年少同共剃髮，似如婬女迭相調戲。」

As they traveled, they laughed and joked together on the road, drawing criticism from the laypeople: "Look at these disciples of the Sakyan ascetic, all young and shaving their heads together, behaving flirtatiously with each other like licentious women."

是輩敗人，何道之有？」

These people are corrupt; what kind of path do they follow?

諸比丘聞已往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」

After hearing this, the monks went to report to the Blessed One. The Buddha said, "Call for the group of six monks."

即呼來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」

They were summoned, and the Buddha asked the group of six monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」

They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「此是惡事，非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

The Buddha said, "This is a bad deed, against the Dharma, against the Vinaya, and not in line with the Buddha's teachings. It cannot be used to cultivate wholesome actions."

從今已去，不聽與比丘尼期共道行。」

From now on, monks are not allowed to travel with nuns.




衛城毘舍離，諸比丘夏安居訖，欲來禮覲世尊。

Next, when the Buddha was residing in Shravasti at Vaishali, the monks, having completed their summer retreat, wished to come and pay respects to the Blessed One.

諸比丘尼聞已即問比丘言：「諸大德欲往禮覲世尊，何日當發？」

The nuns, having heard this, asked the monks, "When do the venerable ones plan to depart to pay respects to the Blessed One?"

諸比丘即語去日，女人長情計日即先往道次住，待諸比丘。

The monks then told them the departure day, and the women, considering the time, went ahead of them to reside along the way, waiting for the monks.

諸比丘見已問言：「姊妹欲何所至？」

When the monks saw them, they asked, "Sisters, where do you wish to go?"

答言：「欲往祇洹禮覲世尊。」

They replied, "We wish to go to Jetavana to pay respects to the Blessed One."

諸比丘聞已，恐畏犯戒故，即疾疾捨去。

Upon hearing this, the monks, fearing to breach the precepts, quickly left.

諸比丘尼中有年少者，即褰衣隨後疾行而逐。

Among the nuns, there were some younger ones who lifted their robes and hurriedly followed.

諸尼中有羸老者，行不及伴，為賊所剝。

Among the nuns, there were some frail and old ones who could not keep up with the group and were robbed by thieves.

諸比丘尼以上因緣白大愛道，大愛道即往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，以上因緣具白世尊，

The nuns reported this incident to Maha Prajapati, and she went to the Blessed One, bowed at his feet, and stood to one side to report the full incident to him.

乃至「諸比丘不將接諸比丘尼者，誰當將接？」

She asked, "If the monks do not accompany the nuns, who then should accompany them?"

佛言：「從今日後，聽恐怖時得共道行。」

The Buddha said, "From this day forth, it is permitted to travel together during times of fear."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all who reside depending on Shravasti; for the sake of ten benefits, I shall establish a rule for the monks, and those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘與比丘尼期共道行，除餘時，波夜提。

If a monk and a nun agree to travel together, except in other times, it is an offense of expiation.

餘時者，恐怖時。」

Other times refer to times of fear."


比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




共期者，若今日若明日、若半月、若一月。

For those in agreement, whether today, tomorrow, half a month later, or a month later.




道者，若三由延、若二由延、若一由延、若一拘盧舍。
A path may be as long as three yojanas, or two yojanas, or one yojana, or even one krosha.




除餘時者

Except for other times

恐怖時

During times of fear

世尊說無罪

The Blessed One said there is no guilt

恐怖者

For one who is frightened

須臾畏奪命、若失物、欲毀梵行

Momentarily afraid of losing life, losing possessions, or desiring to destroy pure conduct

雖無是事

Even if these things do not occur

若有疑是中須臾奪命、失物、毀梵行

If there is doubt regarding momentary loss of life, possessions, or pure conduct




波夜提者，如上說。  
Praṇidhāna means, as said above.  




若比丘共比丘尼共一道行，一聚落中間一波夜提。
If a monk walks together with a nun on the same path, it constitutes a minor offense if they enter the same village.

若空地無聚落，一拘盧舍一波夜提。
If there is no village in an open area, it constitutes a minor offense if they travel together for one krosha.

若比丘共母姊妹出家共隨車伴行，車伴止息發去時，比丘喚比丘尼來：「速勿使不及伴。」作是語者，波夜提。
If a monk travels with his mother or sister who is also a nun, and the monk calls her to catch up with the carriage group when it stops and sets off, it is a minor offense.

若言：「去！去！姊妹勿使失伴。」無罪。
If he says, "Go! Go! Sister, don't lose the group," it is not an offense.

若比丘尼下道止息，比丘喚言：「來！來！姊妹。」已名為期，若舉一足，得越毘尼；舉二足，波夜提。
If a nun stops on the road and the monk calls her saying, "Come! Come! Sister," it is considered a prearrangement; if she takes one step, a serious offense is committed, and if she takes two steps, it is a minor offense.

語言：「去！去！勿使不及伴。」者，無罪。
If he says, "Go! Go! Don't fall behind the group," it is not an offense.

比丘共商人隨道行，商人先入聚落，比丘不知道處借問。
If a monk travels with traders and the traders enter the village first, the monk may not know the location and may ask for directions.

見比丘尼問言：「姊妹！示我道來。」即名共期。
If he sees a nun and asks, "Sister! Show me the way," it is considered a prearrangement.

若比丘尼來，舉一足，得越毘尼；舉二足，波夜提。
If the nun comes and takes one step, a serious offense is committed, and if she takes two steps, it is a minor offense.

得言：「去！去！示我道。」者，不犯。
If he says, "Go! Go! Show me the way," it is not an offense.

若聚落中請比丘食，比丘不知檀越家處，見比丘尼即問言：「知某甲檀越家處不？示我處來。」即名為期。
If a monk is invited to a meal in a village and does not know the location of the patron's house, and asks a nun, "Do you know the location of the patron's house? Show me the way," it is considered a prearrangement.

若舉一足，越毘尼罪；二足，得波夜提。
If she takes one step, a serious offense is committed, and if she takes two steps, it is a minor offense.

若言：「去！去！姊妹示我家處。」無罪。
If he says, "Go! Go! Sister, show me the location," it is not an offense.

若比丘尼期而不去者，越毘尼罪。
If a nun is prearranged to go but does not, a serious offense is committed.

不期默然而去者，無罪。
If she goes without any arrangement in silence, it is not an offense.

共期共去，波夜提。
If they prearrange and go together, it is a minor offense.

不期不去者，無罪。
If there is no arrangement and they do not go, it is not an offense.

共發別入，越毘尼罪。
If they start together but enter separately, a serious offense is committed.

別發同入，越毘尼罪。
If they start separately but enter together, a serious offense is committed.

共發共入，波夜提罪。
If they start and enter together, it is a minor offense.

別發別入，無罪。
If they start and enter separately, it is not an offense.

是故說。
Thus it is stated.




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in Shravasti city, explaining as above.

爾時是吉祥日清旦，男女集在阿耆羅河上，飲食伎樂遊觀。
At that time, it was an auspicious day in the morning, men and women gathered on the Ajira River, eating, drinking, and enjoying music and entertainment.

時六群比丘晨起著入聚落衣，往六群比丘尼所，問言：「今是吉祥日，汝有飲食不？當共詣河上遊觀。」
Then, six groups of monks got up in the morning, dressed in attire suited for entering the settlements, went to the nuns of the six groups, and asked, "Today is an auspicious day, do you have food and drink? Shall we go together to the river to observe and enjoy?"

六群比丘尼言：「正爾當辦，大德可並覓船乘。」
The nuns of the six groups replied, "That's exactly what I'm preparing. Venerables, please find a boat for us to ride."

六群比丘即往至王家船官上，請取好船及種種莊嚴，即持食具置船上，共比丘尼同載順流上下嘲話戲笑。
The monks of the six groups went to the king's official in charge of boats, requested a good boat with various decorations, placed the food utensils on board, and together with the nuns, floated downstream, jesting and laughing.

為世人所譏：「汝等看此沙門釋種子，放逸無道猶如俗人本共交通。」
They were criticized by the common people: "Look at these Shakyamuni monks, reckless and unruly, just like ordinary people without discipline."

此壞敗之人，何道之有？
"What kind of path is there for these corrupted people?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The monks heard about this and, due to this reason, went to report to the Blessed One. The Buddha said, "Call the monks of the six groups to come."

即便呼來。來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
They were called to come immediately. After they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks of the six groups, "Is it true what they say?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It's true."

佛言：「此是惡事，從今日後不得與比丘尼共期載船。」
The Buddha said, "This is improper behavior. From this day forth, you are not to board a boat with nuns."



衛城，

Again, the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti,

爾時阿耆羅河彼岸，

at that time on the other bank of the Ajira River,

請二部僧比丘、比丘尼，

invited the two groups of monastics, monks and nuns,

當受請渡。

were invited to cross.

時不聽比丘尼上船，

At that time, the nuns were not allowed to board the boat,

而比丘或一人一船、或二人一船，

while monks either boarded one per boat or two per boat,

如是三、四船乃至極輕，

like this for three, four boats until very light,

而不載比丘尼。

but did not carry the nuns.

諸比丘渡已方渡比丘尼。

The monks crossed over first, and then the nuns crossed.

比丘尼渡已至其食處，

When the nuns finally crossed to their eating place,

次第歲數，

in proper order and sequence,

如是中間日時已過，

the midday time had already passed,

悉皆斷食。

and all of them had missed their meal.

大愛道瞿曇彌失食，

Great Loving-Kindness Gautami missed her meal,

即往至佛所頭面禮足却住一面，

and went to the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and stood to one side,

佛知而故問：「瞿曇彌！何故羸極？」

the Buddha knew but asked: "Gautami! Why are you so thin?"

大愛道即以上因緣具白世尊，

Great Loving-Kindness explained the reasons fully to the Blessed One,

佛言：「從今日去聽直渡。」

The Buddha said: "From today onward, you are allowed to cross directly."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，

The Buddha told the monks: "Those based in the city of Shravasti, gather together,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，

for the ten benefits I will establish precepts for the monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。

even those who have heard them must listen again.

若比丘與比丘尼期共載船上水下水，

If monks and nuns arrange to ride the boat together upstream or downstream,

除直渡，波夜提。」

except for direct crossings, it is a minor rule offense."



比丘者，如上說。
Bhikshu, as mentioned above.




若今日
If today

若明日
If tomorrow

若半月
If half a month

若一月
If a month




除直渡者，世尊說無罪。
Except for those who have attained direct passage, the World-Honored One says they are without sin.




夜神，乃是夜之精靈。

The night spirits are the spirits of the night.

無形無色，潛於黑暗之中。

Formless and colorless, they lurk in the darkness.

波夜提，彼者夜之神秘者。

Boye Ti, they are the mysterious ones of the night.

如上所述，乃是夜神之名。

As mentioned above, this is the name of the night spirits.

恐懼者畏其名，勇者對其敬畏。

The fearful dread their name, the brave regard them with awe.

傳說娓娓道來，述說其奇異事蹟。

Legends speak in detail, recounting their miraculous feats.




丘尼共期同載，經一聚落間得一波夜提。
If a monk and a nun agree to share a ride, they incur a Pārājika offense passing through a village.

若無聚落，空地者，一拘盧舍一波夜提。
If there is no village, in open space, one Yojana incurs a Pārājika offense.

若比丘與比丘尼共載船岸邊住，比丘尼下船大小行。
If a monk and nun share a boat and stay by the shore, and the nun leaves the boat to urinate or defecate.

時船欲去，比丘喚比丘尼言：「姊妹來！」已名為期。
When the boat is about to leave, if the monk calls to the nun saying, "Sister, come!" it is already considered an agreement.

若舉一足，越毘尼罪；二足，得波夜提。
If one foot is raised, it is a minor transgression; if both feet are raised, a Pārājika offense is incurred.

若共期而不去者，得越毘尼罪。
If they agree to ride but do not leave, it is a minor transgression.

若不期而去者，無罪。
If they leave without prior agreement, there is no offense.

共期共去者，波夜提。
If they agree and leave together, it is a Pārājika offense.

不期不去者，無罪。
If they do not agree and do not leave, there is no offense.

後四句亦如上，是故說。
The last four lines follow the above explanation, hence it is said.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha was staying in the city of Sravasti, expounding as above.

爾時有無歲比丘，著新好染衣來至佛所，頭面禮足而去。
At that time, there was a monk without age who came wearing new, finely dyed robes to where the Buddha was, bowed at his feet, and left.

乃經七年著弊故衣來至世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面。
After seven years, he came to the World-Honored One wearing worn-out robes, bowed at his feet, and stood to one side.

佛知而故問：「比丘！汝先無歲時著新好染衣，今何故著弊故衣？」
The Buddha knew and deliberately asked, "Monk! Previously, when you were without age, you wore new, finely dyed robes. Why are you now wearing worn-out robes?"

答言：「我從七年已來，得好衣與比丘尼。」
He replied, "For seven years now, I have given good robes to the nuns."

佛告諸比丘：「設使親里比丘著如是弊故衣，以好衣與親里尼者，當取不？」
The Buddha told the monks, "If related monks wore such worn-out robes and gave good robes to related nuns, would they take it?"

答言：「不取。」
They replied, "They would not take it."

「設使親里比丘著如是弊故衣，能以好衣與親里比丘尼不？」
"If related monks wore such worn-out robes, would they be able to give good robes to related nuns?"

答言：「不與。」
They replied, "They would not give them."

佛言：「從今日不聽與非親里尼衣。」
The Buddha said, "From today, it is not permitted to give robes to nuns who are not relatives."




衛城，爾時南方有一比丘來，多有衣鉢

At that time, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, a monk from the south came along with many robes and alms bowls.

是比丘有姊於佛法中出家，即語尊者阿難：「送我往看姊尼去。」

This monk had a sister who had renounced the worldly life following the Buddha's teachings, and he requested Venerable Ananda to take him to see his sister.

尊者阿難易倩，即送到比丘尼精舍門住問：「某甲比丘尼在不？」

Venerable Ananda easily agreed and took him to the nunnery's gate, where he asked, "Is such-and-such a nun here?"

比丘尼問言：「喚者是誰？」答言：「我是阿難及某甲比丘。」

The nun asked, "Who is calling?" He replied, "I am Ananda and a certain monk."

比丘尼言：「尊者小住。」即為敷床褥已，入內開半戶喚言：「尊者來入坐。」

The nun said, "Venerable, please wait a moment," then arranged a bedspread, opened the door halfway, and invited, "Venerable, please come in and sit."

即入坐已，共相問訊須臾便出。

After he entered and sat for a while and exchanged greetings, he came out shortly thereafter.

時彼比丘語尊者阿難言：「我故遠來看姊，姊不出看我，為何以故？」

The monk then spoke to Venerable Ananda, "I came all this way to see my sister, but she doesn't come out to see me. Why is that?"

尊者阿難善知相法，語此比丘言：「汝不知汝姊不出意耶？」

Venerable Ananda, being knowledgeable about appearances and conduct, said to the monk, "Do you not know why your sister doesn't come out?"

答言：「不知。」

The monk replied, "I do not know."

阿難言：「汝姊衣裳弊壞羞故不出，汝多有衣何故不與？」

Ananda said, "Your sister is embarrassed because her clothes are worn out, which is why she doesn't come out. You have many robes; why don't you give her one?"

是比丘言：「世尊制戒不得與比丘尼衣。」

The monk replied, "The Blessed One has established a rule that monks are not to give robes to nuns."

阿難言：「汝但與，我當為汝從佛乞聽。」

Ananda said, "You just give it to her, and I will ask the Buddha for permission on your behalf."

阿難即往佛所，頭面禮足却住一面，以上因緣具白世尊：「聽與親里比丘尼衣不？」

Ananda then went to the Buddha, and after bowing at his feet, stood to one side and explained all the circumstances, asking, "Is it permissible to give robes to a related nun?"

佛言：「從今日後聽與親里尼衣。」

The Buddha replied, "From today onward, it is permitted to give robes to a related nun."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

Buddha instructed the monks, "Let all those residing near the city of Shravasti gather. Due to ten benefits, I establish this rule for the monks. Even those who have heard it before should listen again.

若比丘與非親里比丘尼衣，除貿易，波夜提。」

If a monk gives clothing to a nun who is not a relative, except in trade, it is a transgression requiring confession.


比丘尼親里、衣者，皆如上說。
Nuns in their relationships and clothing, all as stated above.




除貿易者，世尊說無罪。
Except for the merchant, the World-Honored One declares there is no guilt.




波夜提者，如上說。
Pācittiya, as stated above.

如上三十事，取比丘尼衣中廣說，是故說。
The aforementioned thirty matters are elaborated on in the bhikkhuni's robe, hence they are stated.



，廣說如上。

The Buddha was staying in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining extensively as above.

爾時善生比丘尼是尊者優陀夷本二，持衣財與優陀夷言：「尊者為我作衣。」

At that time, the Bhikkhuni Sona, who was originally from Venerable Udāyin's group, brought clothing materials and said to Udāyin, "Venerable, make a robe for me."

優陀夷即受為作衣竟，作男女和合像，作已襞疊置箱中與比丘尼。

Udāyin accepted and made the robe, creating images of a man and woman in union, and after making it, folded it and placed it in a box for the Bhikkhuni.

比丘尼得已持還精舍，開看見已歡喜，示諸比丘尼言：「諸阿夷看！此尊者優陀夷作事巧妙。」

The Bhikkhuni, after receiving it and taking it back to the nunnery, opened it and was delighted, showing it to the other Bhikkhunis, saying, "Dear sisters, look! This is the skillful work of Venerable Udāyin."

諸比丘尼嫌言：「此是覆藏之物，云何出現示人？」

The other Bhikkhunis criticized, saying, "This is a hidden object; why is it shown to people?"

諸比丘尼見已往白大愛道，大愛道即以是因緣往白世尊，

The Bhikkhunis, upon seeing it, went to report to Mahāprajāpatī Gotamī, who then went to report the matter to the Blessed One,

佛言：「呼優陀夷來。」即呼來已，佛問優陀夷：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」

The Buddha said, "Call Udāyin here." After he was called, the Buddha asked Udāyin, "Is it true?" He answered, "It is true."

佛言：「此是惡事，非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

The Buddha said, "This is an evil deed, not in accordance with the Dharma, the Vinaya, or the teachings of the Buddha; it cannot be used to cultivate virtuous qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing in dependency at Śrāvastī should gather; for ten reasons, a rule is laid down for the monks, so that even those who have already heard should hear again."

若比丘與非親里比丘尼作衣，波夜提。」

If a monk makes a robe for a Bhikkhuni who is not a relative, it is an offense of expiation (Pācittiya).



比丘、非親里尼者，如上說。
Monks, and those who are not relatives of nuns, according to what has been said above.




作衣者，若自刺、若使人刺，波夜提。
If someone makes clothes, whether sewing by themselves or having others sew, it is a minor rule breach.




波夜提者，如上說。
Night offerings, as previously mentioned.




不得與非親里比丘尼刺衣，針針越毘尼罪。
Do not sew clothes together with a nun who is not a relative; each stitch is a violation of the Vinaya.

綖盡脫針，波夜提。
Once the thread is completely removed, it is a pacittiya (an expiable offense).

若使人刺亦如是。
If you instruct someone to sew, it is the same.

是故說。
Therefore it is said.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha lived in Shravasti, explaining widely as above.

爾時有檀越宿請尊者舍利弗、大目連、離波多、劫賓那、阿若憍陳如等。
At that time, a lay supporter invited Venerable Sariputra, Mahamaudgalyayana, Revata, Aniruddha, and Añña Kondañña to stay overnight.

唯尊者大迦葉不受宿請。
Only Venerable Mahakasyapa did not accept the invitation.

明日時到著入聚落衣，持鉢次行乞食到其門。
The next morning, he put on his village-dwelling robe, took his bowl, and went for alms until he reached their door.

時檀越婦女見已歡喜，即前頭面禮足却住一面，
The laywoman saw him and was delighted. She approached, bowed her head to his feet, and stood aside,

白言：「諸大德比丘！今日盡集受我家請，惟願尊者亦受我請。」
Saying, "Great Venerable Monk, today all are gathered to accept my home's invitation. I wish that the Venerable also accepts my invitation."

時尊者大迦葉作是念：「此是現前。」
Venerable Mahakasyapa thought, "This is in front of me."

即受其請，更不餘行即先入內坐。
He accepted her invitation, did not continue elsewhere, and first went inside to sit.

時偷蘭難陀比丘尼乞食到其家中，
At that time, the nun Sundhara Nanda arrived at their home for alms.

庭見檀越婦灑掃地蕩器辦諸供具，
In the courtyard, she saw the laywoman cleaning the ground, washing utensils, and preparing offerings,

即問言：「優婆夷汝作何等？」
She immediately asked, "Laywoman, what are you doing?"

時婦人營事忙懅不得應，
The woman was too busy with tasks to respond,

如是第二、第三問不答。
And thus did not reply to the second and third questions.

偷蘭難陀即言：「汝今奇事，大自憍重喚而不應。」
Sundhara Nanda said, "You are strange today, ignoring me despite my repeated calls."

婦人答言：「我今日請諸大德聲聞舍利弗、目連等，以是怱務不容得應。」
The woman answered, "Today I invited the great disciples Sariputra and Maudgalyayana, and I am too busy because of this."

偷蘭難陀即言：「汝今所請，於大象群中不取大象而取小象；
Sundhara Nanda said, "Those you invited, among a herd of elephants, do not take the great ones but the small ones;

大鳥群中不取孔雀而取老烏。
Among a flock of birds, do not take the peacock but the old crow.

所謂大象者，闡陀、迦留陀夷、三文陀達多、摩醯沙滿多、馬師滿宿及侍者大德阿難，
The so-called great elephants are Canda, Kālodayin, Ananda, Mahākātyāyana, Vangīsa, and the great attendant Ananda.

汝若使我請者，我當為汝請如是大德。」
If you let me invite, I will invite such great venerables for you."

時尊者大迦葉聞已，大謦咳作聲，
When Venerable Mahakasyapa heard this, he made a loud clearing of his throat,

偷蘭難陀聞已問言：「此是誰聲？」
Upon hearing, Sundhara Nanda asked, "Whose voice is that?"

婦人答言：「此是長老大迦葉。」
The woman answered, "This is Elder Mahakasyapa."

比丘尼即讚歎言：「汝大得善利，乃請如是大龍象，
The nun then praised, "You have gained great benefit, inviting this great noble elephant.

我若當請者亦請是長老！」
If I were to invite, I would also invite this elder!"

時尊者大迦葉聞此語已心不喜悅，
At that time, Venerable Mahakasyapa heard these words and was displeased.

即問言：「姊汝向言：『是小象老烏。』
He immediately asked, "Sister, you previously said: 'Small elephant, old crow.'

今復言：『是龍象大德。』
Now you say: 'Noble elephant, great venerable.'

若前言實者後言虛；若後言實者前言虛。
If the former words were true, the latter words are false; if the latter words are true, the former words are false.

二言之中何者為實？」
Which of the two statements is true?"

尊者大迦葉威德尊重，以此二句詰責比丘尼。
Venerable Mahakasyapa, with authority and respect, reproached the nun with these two sentences.

比丘尼恐懼便走，倒地傷破身體。
The nun, frightened, ran, fell to the ground, and injured her body.

闡陀見已即問尼言：「汝觸擾誰乃如是傷破身體？」
Canda saw and asked the nun, "Who did you disturb to injure your body in such a way?"

答言：「我惱亂大迦葉。」
She answered, "I upset Mahakasyapa."

即語言：「汝不可觸者便觸。」
He said, "That which is not to be touched, you have touched."

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks heard this and reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛語諸比丘：「此中不讚歎猶有過患，況復讚歎。
The Buddha told the monks, "Even without praise, there is fault here, let alone with praise.

從今日後不聽比丘受比丘尼讚歎食。」
From today onward, monks are not permitted to accept food praised by nuns."



難於舍衛城有福德名稱，世尊說三事具足：姓字、眷屬、成就，於學地中多聞第一、給侍第一，令舍衛城有福德里，作新舍處盡請阿難，若入舍時剃髮時、貫耳時，一切盡請阿難。  
Furthermore, the Venerable Ananda had a reputation for virtue in the city of Shravasti. The Blessed One mentioned three complete qualities: family name, relatives, and accomplishments, making him foremost in knowledge and service among the learners. Shravasti city was prosperous because of Ananda, and whenever new houses were built, Ananda was invited to all ceremonies, including entering a new home, shaving, and piercing the ears.

時有長者請尊者阿難設新舍會，云何新？新屋、新床、新器、新飯、新酥油、新兒、婦著新衣持新扇。  
There was a time when an elder invited the Venerable Ananda to a gathering to inaugurate a new house. What was new? A new house, new bed, new utensils, new food, new ghee, new children, women wearing new clothes and holding new fans.

阿難食時，有一乞食比丘在外，阿難即語檀越：「可與外乞食比丘食。」檀越聞阿難教已，歡喜盛滿鉢種種美食持與乞食比丘。  
While Ananda was eating, a begging monk was outside, and Ananda said to the patron, "Please give food to the begging monk outside." Hearing Ananda's instruction, the patron joyfully filled a bowl with a variety of delicious foods and gave it to the begging monk.

乞食比丘得已立待阿難，阿難食訖呪願已便出。乞食比丘見阿難已問言：「尊者食未？」答言：「已食。」  
After receiving the food, the begging monk stood waiting for Ananda. After Ananda finished eating and reciting blessings, he went out. The begging monk saw Ananda and asked, "Venerable, have you eaten?" Ananda replied, "I have eaten."

復問阿難：「食適意好不？」阿難問言：「汝何故不食？乃問我食適不適耶？」  
Then the monk asked Ananda, "Was your meal satisfactory?" Ananda asked, "Why do you not eat and instead ask if my meal was satisfactory?"

乞食比丘言：「尊者所食食是比丘尼所讚歎。」阿難言：「實爾耶？」答言：「如是。」  
The begging monk said, "The food you ate was praised by the nuns." Ananda asked, "Is it true?" The monk replied, "Yes."

阿難即以鳥翮擿吐，是日失食四大飢羸，往至佛所頭面禮足却住一面，佛知而故問：「阿難！汝何故四大飢羸？」  
Ananda then used a bird's feather to induce vomiting, thereby missing his meal and feeling the hunger of the body's four great elements. He went to the Buddha, respectfully bowed, and stood aside. The Buddha, knowing the situation, asked, "Ananda! Why are you so hungry and weak?"

阿難即以上因緣具白世尊，佛問阿難：「汝知不？」答言：「不知。」  
Ananda then explained the situation to the Blessed One, and the Buddha asked Ananda, "Do you know?" Ananda replied, "I do not know."

佛言：「此罪是知，非是不知。」  
The Buddha said, "This fault is in knowing, not in not knowing."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是乞食比丘使阿難不樂？」  
The monks said to the Buddha, "Blessed One! How did that begging monk cause Ananda to be unhappy?"

佛言：「不但今日使阿難不樂，如《賢鳥生經》中廣說。」  
The Buddha said, "Not only today did he cause Ananda to be unhappy, as is extensively explained in the Parable of the Virtuous Bird.


衛城，爾時長老比丘時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入城次行乞食，來去屈伸威儀庠序。
Once, when Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, elder monks would wear their village attire and enter the city with their alms bowls, behaving with dignity as they begged for food.

時有一長者作如是言：「善哉大德！大得善利，施如是出家人衣服、飲食、病瘦醫藥者。」
At that time, an elder exclaimed, "Great indeed is the virtue! Great blessings come to those who offer clothing, food, and medicine to monastics."

又作是念：「我若有人力者亦當供養如是等出家人。」
He further thought, "If I had the means, I too would support such monastics."

時有比丘尼聞已，語長者言：「長壽！汝但出食直，我當相為料理。」
A nun heard this and said to the elder, "May you live long! You simply need to sponsor the food, and I will handle the arrangements."

是檀越信心歡喜即與食直。
The benefactor, full of faith and joy, then provided the food funds.

比丘尼言：「長壽！汝當請比丘。」
The nun said, "May you live long! You should invite the monks."

答言：「我不知，願為我請。」
He replied, "I do not know how. Please invite them for me."

比丘尼即辦種種飲食已，語檀越言：「長壽！食具已辦，汝往至比丘所白言時至。」
The nun prepared a variety of foods and told the benefactor, "May you live long! The food is ready; you may go inform the monks that it is time."

檀越言：「我不知，尼但為我往白時至。」
The benefactor said, "I do not know how; please inform them for me."

比丘尼即往白時至，比丘來入檀越家坐，坐訖比丘尼語檀越言：「此種種供食汝可自行。」
The nun went to inform them that it was time. The monks entered the benefactor's house and sat down. After sitting, the nun told the benefactor, "You can serve this variety of food yourself."

檀越言：「阿姨為我行。」
The benefactor said, "Aunt, please serve it for me."

諸比丘作是念：「此是比丘尼所讚歎食不？」
The monks thought, "Is this meal praised by the nun?"

疑已即出，如是一人、二人乃至一切眾都出。
In doubt, they began to leave, one by one, until all had departed.

檀越問比丘尼言：「諸尊者何故盡出不復來還？」
The benefactor asked the nun, "Why did all the venerable ones leave without returning?"

尼答言：「我不知，汝往世尊所廣問斯事，當為汝說。」
The nun replied, "I do not know; you should ask the Blessed One to explain this matter to you."

是檀越即往佛所，頭面禮足却住一面，以上因緣廣白世尊。
The benefactor then went to the Buddha, prostrated at His feet, stood to one side, and explained the situation in detail to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼諸比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Summon the monks here."

呼來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
After they were summoned, the Buddha asked them in detail about the matter, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「從今日後聽除舊檀越。」
Buddha said, "From today onwards, you may abandon old benefactors."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha instructed the monks in Śrāvastī to gather and stated the ten benefits of adhering to this rule for all monks, even those who have heard it before, to hear it again.

若比丘知比丘尼讚歎食，除舊檀越，波夜提。
If a monk knows that a nun praises food, he may abandon the old benefactor, and it shall be an offense of expiation


丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, as mentioned above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
The wise are those who either understand themselves or learn from others.




讚歎者，稱美其德。
Those who praise, extol their virtue.




麨

Parched flour

麵

Noodles

飯

Rice

魚

Fish

肉

Meat




除舊檀越者  
Those who remove the old patrons

世尊說無罪  
The World-Honored One says there is no guilt




波夜提者，如上說。
Bo Ye Ti Zhe, as mentioned above.




、始下食時歎、有初作食時歎、作食辦已歎，有請時歎。
Chanting praises during offering time, praise at the start of meal time, praise at the beginning of food preparation, praise when the food is ready, and there is praise during the invitation time.

唱等供時歎者，下食都訖唱等供時，更有餘比丘來，
When chanting praises during offering time, after the meal is finished and the chanting is done, if more monks arrive,

比丘尼語優婆夷言：「更有比丘來。」
A nun tells an upāsikā, "More monks have come."

優婆夷言：「善哉！我歡喜故遣使請尚不能得，何況自來？」
The upāsikā says, "Excellent! I sent an invitation with joy but could not get them, let alone if they come on their own."

是不名讚歎。
This is not called praise.

若比丘尼言：「此是阿練若、乞食、糞掃衣、露坐、草蓐。」
If a nun says, "This is a forest dweller, begging for food, wearing rag robes, sitting in the open, using grass mats."

如是歎得食，食者，波夜提。
Praising in this way to get food, the food is praṇīta (delicious).

下食時者，初下食時更有餘比丘來，亦如上說。
At meal time, if more monks arrive at the beginning, it is also as mentioned above.

作時歎者，初作時更有餘比丘來，亦如是說。
During preparation, if more monks arrive initially, it is spoken the same way.

作竟歎者，一切作供辦訖，更有餘比丘來，
After completion, once all offerings are prepared, if more monks arrive,

比丘尼語優婆夷言：「更有比丘來。」
A nun tells an upāsikā, "More monks have come."

優婆夷言：「善哉！我故遣請猶不能得，何況自來？」
The upāsikā says, "Excellent! I sent an invitation yet could not get them, let alone if they come on their own."

不名讚歎。
This is not called praise.

優婆夷言：「當多與麨餅飯好食平等與。」
The upāsikā says, "Give more gruel, cakes, and good food equally."

不名讚歎。
This is not called praise.

若飲食少，更語檀越：「為作一掬麨。」者，波夜提。
If there is little food, tell the donor, "Make a handful of gruel." This is praṇīta.

請者，稱名請。
Inviting means naming the invitation.

比丘尼語檀越言：「某甲徒眾多聞精進，當通請一切。」
A nun tells the donor, "Such and such disciples are known for their zeal, invite everyone openly."

名讚歎食。
This is called praising food.

若言：「某甲眾主多聞精進，為是比丘故通請二十人。」
If saying, "Such and such a leader is famous for zeal, invite twenty people because of this monk."

是一人名為讚歎，餘者不犯。
For one person, it is called praise; others do not violate.

若有如是讚歎食者，當展轉貿食，不得捨食而去。
If there are those who praise food in this way, they should exchange food in turns, not leaving it behind.

若比坐垢穢不淨，不喜與貿者，當作是念：
If sitting with impurity and defilement, unwilling to exchange,

「此鉢中食是某甲比丘許我，當食無罪。」
"This food in the bowl is permitted to me by such and such monk, it is blameless to eat."

若比丘尼語優婆夷言：「尊者某甲可長請供養。」
If a nun tells an upāsikā, "Venerable so-and-so can be invited for long-term offerings."

此即名讚歎。
This is called praise.

若言：「尊者某甲可常乞食。」不名為讚歎。
If saying, "Venerable so-and-so can always beg for food," it is not called praise.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said


僧不差日冥，
Monks do not make mistakes at dusk,

不白為食故，
Not showing purity for the sake of food,




共坐同道行，
We sit together, journeying the same path,

船上及與衣，
On the boat, along with clothing,



作衣讚歎食。
Making clothes, praising food.

第三跋渠竟。
The third section is done.




摩訶僧祇律卷第十五  
Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll Fifteen




