我将用中文翻译以下几行。

I will translate the following lines into Chinese.

麻烦你请给我一些时间。

Please give me some time.

谢谢你的耐心。

Thank you for your patience.

我会尽力而为。

I will do my best.

期待你的反馈。

Looking forward to your feedback.




【僧祇律卷第五】

The fifth volume of the Sangha Vinaya

如是我聞：

Thus have I heard:

一時佛在室羅伐城逝多林給孤獨園。

At one time the Buddha was in the Jeta Grove, Anathapindika's Park, near Shravasti.

爾時佛語諸比丘：

At that time, the Buddha spoke to the monks:

諸比丘答言如此。

The monks responded, "Thus it is."

佛言。

The Buddha said.




#版本记录 发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

#Version History Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由

[Editing Instructions] This database is provided by

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）

the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA)

依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

and is edited based on the Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō.




【原始资料】萧镇国大德提供，伽耶山基金会提供，北美某大德提供，释本禅法师提供新式标点

[Original Data] Provided by Venerable Hsiao Zhenguo, Gaya Mountain Foundation, a certain North American Venerable, and Venerable Shiben Chan who provided the new punctuation.




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other matters] This database is freely available for circulation. For detailed information, please refer to the "Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Association Database."




 please provide the lines you would like translated


第二十一卷

Volume Twenty-One

沙彌法

The Rules for Novice Monks

若有沙彌受戒已未滿二十年者?若犯四重者突吉羅罪。

If there is a novice monk who has taken vows but is not yet twenty years old, if he commits one of the four major offenses, he incurs a duṣkṛta offense.

沙彌若犯五羯磨重者吉羅罪。

If a novice monk commits any of the five offenses related to communal actions, it is a duṣkṛta offense.

比丘犯七滅摹者得輕罪。

If a bhikṣu (monk) commits any of the seven offenses leading to exclusion, he incurs a minor offense.

佛言。

The Buddha said,

我今自具足汝等隨學。

I now possess everything, and you should follow and learn.




明單提九十二事法之十

The ten of the ninety-two rules clearly listed




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī and explained as previously mentioned.

爾時尊者陀驃摩羅子，僧拜典知九事如上說。
At that time, the venerable Dhammaramaputra, the monastic official, knew the nine matters as previously mentioned.

乃至陀驃摩羅子，右手小指放光作明，隨次付房，阿練若、阿練若共，
Even Dhammaramaputra, with a light emanating from the small finger of his right hand, accordingly assigned the abodes: forest dwellings, forest dwellings together,

乞食、乞食共，糞掃衣、糞掃衣共，
Begging for alms, begging for alms together; rag robes, rag robes together;

一坐食、一坐食共，常坐、常坐共，
Eating in one session, eating in one session together; constantly sitting, constantly sitting together;

露坐、露坐共，草蓐、草蓐共，
Sitting in the open air, sitting in the open air together; grass mats, grass mats together;

經唄、經唄共，法師、法師共，學律、學律共，
Reciting scriptures, reciting scriptures together; expounding the Dharma, expounding the Dharma together; studying the Vinaya, studying the Vinaya together;

阿羅漢、阿羅漢共，三明、三明共，
Arahantship, Arahantship together; the three insights, the three insights together;

六通、六通共，無威儀、無威儀共。
The six supernormal powers, the six supernormal powers together; lack of proper conduct, lack of proper conduct together.

爾時六群比丘語陀驃言：「長老！與我等六人共一處住。」
At that time, a group of six bhikkhus said to Dhammaramaputra, "Elder! Allow us six to live together in one place."

答言：「待汝伴中最下坐，次得房，隨意共住。」
He replied, "Wait for the last seat among your group, then get a room and live together as you wish."

時是伴下坐次得弊房，臥床、坐床、褥枕諸物，皆悉弊故。
At that time, the last among their group received a poor room; the bed, seating mat, and cushions were all worn out.

又別房食，亦復麁惡，自相謂言：「長老陀驃如我生怨，與我弊房麁食。
In addition, the food in the separate room was also coarse and inferior, and they mutually said, "Elder Dhammaramaputra seems to be hostile towards us, giving us a poor room and inferior food.

是長老！若久住梵行者，方令我等得大苦惱。
If this Elder stayed long in religious conduct, it would greatly trouble us.

然世尊制戒不得無根波羅夷法謗，今當以僧伽婆尸沙法謗。」
However, the World-Honored One set a rule not to falsely accuse without proof of a grave offense, but now we will accuse through the Sanghabashyasa rule."

即往到其所，作是言：「長老！汝犯僧伽婆尸沙罪。」
They immediately went to Dhammaramaputra's place and said, "Elder! You have committed the Sanghabashyasa offense."

答言：「我無是罪。」
He replied, "I have no such offense."

彼言：「誰復作賊，言我是賊？但汝犯僧伽婆尸沙罪。」
They said, "Who else would be the thief, claiming I am the thief? Yet you have committed the Sanghabashyasa offense."

即屏處謗、眾多人中謗、僧中謗陀驃比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙罪。
They accused him in private places, among many people, and in the Sangha, saying that Dhammaramaputra committed the Sanghabashyasa offense.

時陀驃比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
At that time, Bhikkhu Dhammaramaputra went to the World-Honored One because of this situation,

佛言：「汝有是事不？」答言：「無也。」
The Buddha said, "Do you have this matter?" He replied, "No."

佛言：「汝無此罪，世尊知汝清淨。」
The Buddha said, "You do not have this offense; the World-Honored One knows that you are pure."

陀驃言：「世尊雖知我無罪，唯願世尊當語彼人令生信心，莫令長夜誹謗得不饒益。」
Dhammaramaputra said, "Although the World-Honored One knows I am innocent, I only wish the World-Honored One would speak to those people to give rise to trust and not let prolonged slander cause unbeneficial outcomes."

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
The Buddha said, "Call the group of six bhikkhus." After they came, the Buddha fully inquired about the matter: "Is it true?" They replied, "Indeed it is."

佛語六群比丘：「此是惡事。
The Buddha said to the group of six bhikkhus, "This is an evil act.

汝常不聞我無量方便，說於梵行人應起恭敬，身行慈、口行慈、意行慈？
Have you not often heard my countless methods, saying that one should arise respect for those in religious conduct, act kindly in body, speech, and mind?

汝今云何以無根僧伽婆尸沙法謗？
How could you now falsely accuse with the baseless Sanghabashyasa rule?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not Dharma, not Vinaya, not according to the Buddha's teachings, and should not be used to cultivate good Dharma."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
The Buddha told the bhikkhus, "Those residing in Śrāvastī City should all gather; for the sake of ten benefits, I establish a rule for the bhikkhus,

乃至已聞者當重聞。
So that even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘瞋恨不喜，以無根僧伽婆尸沙法謗他比丘，波夜提。」
If a bhikkhu out of anger, dissatisfaction, uses a baseless Sanghabashyasa rule to accuse another bhikkhu, it results in an offense of expiation."



比丘者，如上說。

Bikkhu, as mentioned above.




瞋者，九惱事及非處起瞋。
As for anger, it arises from the nine afflictions and unreasonable situations.

第十恨者，凡夫及學人有不喜者，乃至阿羅漢有無根者，
The tenth resentment is when ordinary people and learners have dislike, even if Arhats have no basis for it.

事原不現，又不見彼事、不聞彼事、不疑彼事，
The matter originally does not appear, nor do they see, hear, or doubt the matter.

僧伽婆尸沙者十三事中，若一一謗，波夜提。
Among the thirteen Sanghadhisesa offenses, if any are slandered, there is a Pārājika.




波夜提者，如上說。
Boya Ti, as mentioned above.




若比丘瞋恨，有二相似，清淨、不清淨。
If a monk is hateful, there are two likenesses, pure and impure.

清淨者言：「汝見我犯何罪？」
The pure one says: "What sin do you see me committing?"

十三事中若一、若二，彼不見、不聞、不疑、不決了，若屏處、若眾多、若僧中作是言：「我見汝犯僧伽婆尸沙、我聞汝犯僧伽婆尸沙、我疑汝犯僧伽婆尸沙。」
In thirteen matters, one or two, he does not see, does not hear, does not doubt, is not resolved, whether in isolation, among the many, or among the monks he says: "I see you commit a Sanghabhasisa offense, I heard you commit a Sanghabhasisa offense, I doubt you committed a Sanghabhasisa offense."

聞不實聞根不實、疑不實疑根不實、本曾見忘聞忘疑忘、見不爾、聞不爾、疑不爾，對面四目謗，語語，波夜提。
Hearing the unreal from an unreal root, doubting unreal from an unreal root, originally seeing forgotten, hearing forgotten, doubting forgotten, not seeing, not hearing, not doubting, slandering face to face, word after word, Pācīttiya.

清淨不清淨想謗，偷蘭遮。欲驅出，波夜提。
Thinking pure while slandering impurely, Thullaccaya. Wanting to expel, Pācīttiya.

不清淨清淨想謗，越比尼罪。欲驅出，偷蘭遮。
Thinking impure while slandering purely, Transgression of a Vinaya rule. Wanting to expel, Thullaccaya.

清淨清淨想謗，偷蘭遮。欲驅出，波夜提。
Thinking purely while slandering purely, Thullaccaya. Wanting to expel, Pācīttiya.

不清淨不清淨想毀呰，波夜提。
Thinking impurely while destroying impurely, Pācīttiya.

謗比丘，波夜提。
Slandering a monk, Pācīttiya.

謗比丘尼，偷蘭遮。
Slandering a nun, Thullaccaya.

謗式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，越比尼罪。
Slandering a sikkhamana, a novice monk, or novice nun, Transgression of a Vinaya rule.

謗俗人，越比尼心悔。
Slandering a layperson, remorse for a Vinaya thought transgression.

是故說。
Therefore it is said.




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha resided in Sravasti and spoke extensively as stated above.

時有比丘乞食時到，著衣持鉢入城，次行乞食到一家。
At that time, a monk arrived during alms round, wore his robes, carried his alms bowl, and entered the city, proceeding from house to house for alms.

婦人言：「尊者！我至某日當飯僧并施衣。」
A woman said, "Venerable Sir! I intend to offer food to the monks and donate robes on a certain day."

比丘答言：「善哉優婆夷！當及時為於身命財修三堅法，常修習行勿令留難。」
The monk replied, "Good, laywoman! You should timely cultivate the three firm practices concerning body, life, and wealth, always practice and act without obstruction."

乞食比丘還精舍已，語諸比丘：「長老！我語汝善事。」
After the alms round, the monk returned to the monastery and said to the monks, "Elders! I have good news to share with you."

問：「何等善事？」
They asked, "What good news?"

答言：「某甲家到彼日當飯僧并施衣。」
He replied, "On that day, a certain household intends to offer food to the monks and donate robes."

時難陀、優波難陀去不遠，聞語聲即問：「彼家在何處？姓字何等？門戶那向？」
At that time, Nanda and Ubhaya Nanda, not far away, heard this and asked, "Where is that household? What is their surname? Facing which direction is their door?"

具問知已，明日晨朝往到其家謂優婆夷：「我聞好聲。」
Upon finding out, they went to that house the next morning and said to the laywoman, "We heard some good news."

「尊者聞何等聲？」
The laywoman asked, "What news did you hear, Venerable Sir?"

「聞汝欲飯僧施衣，為實爾不？」
They said, "Is it true that you intend to offer food to monks and donate robes?"

答言：「始有是心，但恐中間有留難，知當果不？」
She answered, "I initially had this intention, but I fear obstacles in between. Can I know the result in advance?"

優波難陀語優婆夷曰：「汝可持是衣施與難陀。」
Ubhaya Nanda said to the laywoman, "You should give this robe and offer it to Nanda."

答言：「我家更無餘物，正有是衣，本欲施僧，今不可迴轉。」
She replied, "I have nothing else in my house, just this robe, which I intended to offer to the monks; it cannot be reversed now."

優婆難陀即毀呰言：「何等是僧？老烏亦僧，老鵄亦僧。」
Ubhaya Nanda then criticized, saying, "What kind of monks are they? Old crows are monks, old vultures are monks."

僧如穿臼漏槽不可滿足，僧於汝有何利益？
"Monks are like worn-out sieves that cannot be filled; what benefit do monks bring to you?"

能為汝活男活女？能至王家斷理官事耶？
"Can they save your sons or daughters? Can they go to the royal household and resolve legal matters for you?"

難陀能為汝作多利益事，但持是衣施與難陀。」
"Nanda can bring you many benefits, so just give this robe to Nanda."

優婆夷答辭如初。
The laywoman replied as before.

時難陀復勸與優波難陀，如上說。
Then Nanda again encouraged and said to Ubhaya Nanda, as stated above.

優婆夷猶言：「我家更無餘物，適欲迴施尊者，然先以許僧，不可迴轉。」
The laywoman still said, "I have nothing else in my house, and I intended to give it to the venerable one, but since it was initially meant for the monks, I cannot retract it."

優波難陀言：「與以不與任汝意。」
Ubhaya Nanda said, "Whether you give it or not is up to you."

作是語已，即便捨去。
Saying this, they immediately left.

時優婆夷作是念：「此衣適欲與難陀，然僧是良福田，適欲施僧。
At that time, the laywoman thought, "I intended to give this robe to Nanda, but monks are a good field of merit; I want to offer to the monks.

然難陀有大力勢，恐與我作不饒益事。」
But Nanda has great power and influence, and I fear he may do things that do not benefit me."

思惟是已，遂不復施。
After contemplating this, she decided not to give it.

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。
Upon hearing this, the monks went and informed the Blessed One of the situation.

佛言：「呼優波難陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Ubhaya Nanda here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha fully inquired about the matter, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It's true."

佛言：「癡人！作此三惡事，施者失福，受者失利，輕毀眾僧。」
The Buddha said, "Foolish person! You committed these three misdeeds: the giver loses merit, the receiver loses benefit, and it disrespects the sangha."

佛語優婆難陀：「汝常不聞，我以無量方便，讚歎少欲、毀呰多欲耶？
The Buddha said to Ubhaya Nanda, "Have you not often heard that I, with innumerable skillful means, praise few desires and criticize greed?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not the Dharma, not the discipline, not according to the Buddha's teachings, and cannot nourish good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all those residing in Sravasti and, for the sake of ten benefits, I will lay down a rule for monks; those who have heard it must hear it again.

若比丘知物向僧，迴向餘人，波夜提。」
If a monk knows something intended for the sangha and diverts it to another person, it results in an offense known as pacittiya."



比丘者，如上說。  
A bhikkhu, as stated above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
The knowledgeable, be it from self-awareness or from others' teachings.




物者，八種，乃至淨不淨。
Objects, eight types, either pure or impure.




向者，物分處已定。
In the past, the positions of things were already determined.




僧者，八種，如上說。
Monks, there are eight types, as stated above.




迴者，轉與餘人，波夜提。
A returner, transfers to others, Patimokkha.




波夜提者，如上說。

Poyatizhe, as mentioned above.




若人持物來問比丘言：「尊者！我欲以此物施，當施何處？」
If someone comes with an item and asks a monk, "Venerable! I want to offer this item, where should it be offered?"

應語：「隨汝心樂處，便可與之。」
He should reply, "Wherever your heart is pleased, you may give it."

若復問：「何處得大果報？」
If he further asks, "Where can I obtain the greatest reward?"

應語：「施僧得大果報。」
He should reply, "Offering to the Sangha brings the greatest reward."

復問：「何處僧持戒？我欲施之。」
Further asks, "Where are the monks who keep the precepts? I wish to offer to them."

應語：「無有犯戒僧。」
He should reply, "There are no monks who violate the precepts."

若復問：「何處比丘精勤修業，能愛護物，恒住於此，使我常見得。」
If he further asks, "Where is a monk who is diligent in practice, able to take care of things, and always resides here, so I may constantly see him."

語：「某甲比丘精勤修業，能愛護物，常住於此。施彼比丘，恒可得見。」
He should say, "A certain monk is diligent in practice, able to take care of things, and always resides here. By offering to that monk, you can always see him."

若言：「我欲持此物施與尊者。」
If he says, "I wish to offer this item to the Venerable."

應語：「施僧。」
He should reply, "Offer it to the Sangha."

若言：「我已施僧，意欲施尊者，願為受之。」
If he says, "I have already offered to the Sangha, but also wish to offer to the Venerable, please accept it."

取無罪。
Receiving is not a fault.

若比丘知物向僧，迴向已者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk knows the item is directed towards the Sangha but redirects it to himself, it is a Nissaggiya Pacittiya offense.

迴向餘人者，波夜提。
Redirecting it to others is a Pacittiya offense.

若比丘知向僧物，迴向餘僧，越比尼罪。
If a monk knows an item for the Sangha is redirected to another monk, it is an exceeding Bhikkhuni offense.

眾多人物，迴向眾多人，越比尼罪。
For many items redirected to many people, it is an exceeding Bhikkhuni offense.

乃至畜生，迴與彼畜生，越比尼罪心悔。
Even to animals, redirecting to those animals, it is an exceeding Bhikkhuni offense with remorse.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha lived in the city of Shravasti, and spoke extensively as above.

爾時六群比丘半月說波羅提木叉時、說四事時默然，說十三事時瞋，三十事時語，九十二波夜提時便起，
At that time, when the six groups of monks recited the Pratimoksha bi-monthly, they were silent on four matters, angry on thirteen matters, talked during thirty matters, and stood up during the ninety-two Pratayana rules.

作是言：「長老！此是世尊說耶？世尊在何處說？」
They said, "Elders! Did the Blessed One say this? Where did the Blessed One say this?"

若我久在世者，如是事比所聞轉多，此便是法母，更生禁戒遂滋。」
If I were to live long in this world, such matters, compared to what has been heard, would increase further, this would be the mother of the Dharma, constantly generating prohibitions.

諸比丘聞是語慚愧，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks felt ashamed upon hearing these words and reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha thoroughly asked about the matter, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛語六群比丘：「此是惡事。
The Buddha said to the six groups of monks, "This is a wrongful act.

如來欲饒益故，為諸弟子制戒，半月說波羅提木叉。
The Tathagata, desiring to benefit, has established precepts for the disciples, and every half month, the Pratimoksha is recited.

汝云何嫌遮？此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
How can you resent it? This is neither Dharma, nor discipline, nor in accordance with the Buddha's teaching; it cannot nurture good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
The Buddha told the monks, "All those who reside near the city of Shravasti, let them all assemble,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
and for the sake of ten benefits, precepts are established for the monks, even those who have heard before should hear again.

若比丘半月說波羅提木叉時，作是言：
If a monk, during the fortnightly recitation of the Pratimoksha, says:

『我今始知是法入修多羅，半月波羅提木叉中說。』
'I now begin to understand this Dharma, as stated in the fortnightly Pratimoksha.'

諸比丘知彼比丘本，若二、若三說波羅提木叉中坐，況復多。
The monks should know this monk's fundamental nature, whether two or three recite the Pratimoksha sitting together, let alone many.

彼比丘不以不知故得脫，隨所犯罪如法治，
That monk does not escape due to ignorance; he is to be dealt with according to the law based on the offense committed,

應呵言：『長老！汝失善利，
and should be reproached, saying: 'Elder! You miss out on good benefits,

半月說波羅提木叉時，汝不尊重、不一心念、不攝耳聽法。』
During the fortnightly recitation of the Pratimoksha, you showed no respect, did not concentrate, and did not listen attentively to the Dharma.'

呵已，波夜提。」
After being reproached, Pratayana applies."



比丘者，如上說。  
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




半月者，若十四日、十五日。
Half a month refers to fourteen or fifteen days.




波羅提木叉者，十二修多羅。
The Prātimokṣa is the twelve sūtras.




說者，謂作是語：「我今始知是法，半月波羅提木叉中攝。」
The speaker said, "I now know that this law is included in the fortnightly recitation of the Pātimokkha."

是比丘知彼若二、若三說波羅提木叉中坐，況復多，彼比丘不以不知故無罪。
The monk knows whether two or three are reciting the Pātimokkha, let alone more; that monk is not absolved of guilt due to ignorance.

隨所犯罪，如法如比尼治。
Punishment should be administered according to the offense, following the law and discipline.

應呵言：「長老！汝失善利，半月說波羅提木叉時，汝不尊重、不一心念、不攝耳聽法。」
He should be rebuked, "Elder! You have lost a great benefit, at the fortnightly recitation of the Pātimokkha, you did not show respect, concentrate, nor listen attentively."

呵已，波夜提悔過。
After being rebuked, he should confess his offense with remorse.




波夜提者，如上說。
Boya Ti is as described above.




受具足已，應誦二部比尼。
After receiving full ordination, one should recite the two parts of the Vinaya.

若不能誦二部，當誦一部。
If one cannot recite the two parts, they should recite one part.

若不能誦一部，當廣誦五眾戒。
If one cannot recite one part, then they should extensively recite the five group precepts.

若不能者，當廣誦四眾戒。
If one still cannot, they should extensively recite the four group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦三眾戒。
If they still cannot, they should extensively recite the three group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦二眾戒。
If they still cannot, they should extensively recite the two group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦一眾戒及偈。
If still unable, they should extensively recite one group precept and verses.

若布薩時廣說五眾戒。
During the Uposatha, extensively recite the five group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦四眾戒。
If one still cannot, they should extensively recite the four group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦三眾戒。
If they still cannot, they should extensively recite the three group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦二眾戒。
If they still cannot, they should extensively recite the two group precepts.

若復不能者，當廣誦一眾戒及偈。
If still unable, they should extensively recite one group precept and verses.

餘者，僧常聞。
The rest are frequently heard by the Sangha.

不誦者，越比尼罪。
Those who do not recite, transgress the Vinaya.

僧中應使誦利者說，餘人專心聽。
In the Sangha, those skilled in recitation should speak, and the others should listen attentively.

佛言：「誦波羅提木叉時，餘比丘不得坐禪及作餘業，皆應專心共聽。」
The Buddha said: "During the recitation of the Pratimoksha, other monks should not meditate or do other work, but all should listen attentively."

若四事聽、十三事不聽，越比尼罪。
If four matters are heard and thirteen are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

十三事聽、二不定法不聽，越比尼罪。
If thirteen matters are heard and two indefinite laws are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

二不定聽、三十事不聽，越比尼罪。
If two indefinite laws are heard and thirty matters are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

三十事聽、九十二事不聽，越比尼罪。
If thirty matters are heard and ninety-two matters are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

九十二事聽、四波羅提提舍尼不聽，越比尼罪。
If ninety-two matters are heard and four Parajika offenses are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

四波羅提提舍尼聽、眾學不聽，越比尼罪。
If the four Parajika offenses are heard and the communal learning is not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

眾學聽、七滅諍不聽，越比尼罪。
If the communal learning is heard and the seven methods of resolving disputes are not, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

若中間隨不聽，隨得越比尼罪。
If in between any are not heard, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

一切不聽，波夜提。
If none are heard, it is a Pācittiya offense.



此罪不得趣向人悔過，
This offense cannot be repented by going to others,

當於眾中持戒、有威德、人所敬難者，於前悔。
One should repent in front of a virtuous, authoritative, and respected person among the assembly.

前人應呵言：
The former should reprimand, saying:

「長老！汝失善利，半月說波羅提木叉時，
"Elder! You have lost a good benefit, during the fortnightly recitation of the Prātimokṣa,

汝不尊重、不一心念、不攝耳聽法。」
you were not respectful, not mindful, and did not listen attentively."

呵已，
After the reprimand,

波夜提悔過。
the Pācittika offense is confessed.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



食家入王宮，
The chef enters the king's palace,

鍼筒床二褥，
A needle case and two layers of bedding on the bed,




椅子覆蓋著破爛的衣服，  
The chair is covered with tattered clothes,  

如同雨衣一般。  
like a raincoat.  




無根謗第十，  
The tenth is baseless slander,  

迴向遮布薩。  
Dedicated to Jambudvīpa.  




第九跋渠竟

The Ninth Baqu is finished.




四提舍尼初
The Four Foundations of Mindfulness




佛住迦維羅衛釋氏精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the Sakya Monastery of Kapilavastu and spoke extensively as above.

爾時諸比丘在阿練若處，時諸釋種父母、姊妹、親里家，遣使齎飲食送與比丘所。
At that time, the monks were in the forest abode, and the Sakya families sent messengers with food to the monks.

齎食人於道中食半、或食三分中一分、或都食盡。
The messengers ate half, a third, or all of the food along the way.

是諸比丘有歸家看者，親里問言：「我先送種種飲食，為悉達不？」
Some monks returned home, and the relatives asked, "Did the food I sent reach you?"

其中到者言：「到。」半到者言：「半到。」三分中一分到者言：「一分到。」不到者言：「不到。」
Those who received it said, "Yes, it arrived." Those who received half said, "Half arrived." Those who received a third said, "A third arrived." Those who received none said, "None arrived."

親里聞已，即瞋恚言：「弊惡死人，使汝送食，何敢取食？」
The relatives were angry on hearing this, saying, "Despicable messengers, how dare you take the food?"

即便鞭打。此使人得苦痛，大啼喚言：「坐是沙門令我得打。」
They whipped the messengers, causing them pain and making them cry out, "It's because of the monks that we are beaten."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼是諸比丘來。」
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call those monks here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
When they came, the Buddha asked about the matter and they replied, "It is true."

佛語諸比丘：「汝云何阿練若處住，先不語外、外不受內，自手取而食。
The Buddha said to the monks, "How can you, living in the forest, not communicate externally and yet eat what is taken by your own hands?

從今日後不聽阿練若處住，先不語外、外不受內，自手取。」
From today onwards, you may not live in the forest, take without communication, and eat by your own hands."




維羅衛釋氏精舍，廣說如上。  
Furthermore, the Buddha dwelled at the Sakya monastery in Kapilavastu, expounding extensively as above.

如來、應供、正遍知五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見比丘羸病顏色萎黃，知而故問：「比丘氣力足不？」  
For the benefit of five matters concerning the Tathagata, Arahant, and Fully Enlightened One, he visited the monks' quarters every five days and noticed a monk looking emaciated and pale, so he knowingly asked, "Do you have enough strength, monk?"

答言：「病苦。世尊。」  
The monk replied, "I am suffering from illness, World-Honored One."

佛問比丘：「汝不能服隨病藥、隨病食耶？」  
The Buddha asked the monk, "Can't you take medicine or food suitable for your illness?"

白言：「世尊制戒不聽阿練若處住，先不語外、外不受內，自手取。世尊！我病不能出外，是故羸瘦病苦。」  
The monk answered, "The rules set by the World-Honored One do not allow us to live in secluded places, nor take food without permission. I am too ill to go out, hence my emaciation and suffering."

佛言：「從今日聽病比丘內取。」  
The Buddha said, "From today, ill monks are allowed to receive food internally."

佛告諸比丘：「依止迦維羅衛住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "All residing in Kapilavastu should gather, as I will establish a rule for the benefit of ten reasons, for those who have heard and those who should hear again.

若比丘阿練若處住，先不語不病比丘，外不受內，自手取，若噉若食，是比丘應餘比丘邊悔過。  
If a monk residing in seclusion does not first inform a healthy monk internally and takes food himself, that monk should confess his transgression to another monk.

如是言：『長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。』初波羅提提舍尼法。」  
Thus he should say, 'Venerable, I have fallen into a fault, this is my confession.' This is the first offense entailing confession."



比丘者，如上說。
Monks, as previously mentioned.




阿練若處者，如上說。

For those in the Aranya places, as mentioned above.




先不語者，語有二種：分數、不分數。
Those who do not speak first, speech has two types: specific and non-specific.

分數者，先語：「當送爾許、爾許種飲食。」
The specific type says first: "You should provide such and such types of food."

不分數者，直言：「當送食。」不列種數。
The non-specific type directly says: "You should provide food." No list of types.




外不受者，不精舍外。
The one who does not accept from outside, is not outside the dwelling.

受內者，精舍內。
The one who accepts inside, is within the dwelling.




病者

The sick

下病、冷病、風病

Lower sickness, cold sickness, wind sickness

如是比病不堪出外取食

Such illnesses make it hard to go out for food

是故世尊說無罪

Thus, the World Honored One says there is no sin




自手受者，

When receiving with hands,

手從手受、

hands take from hands,

器從器受。

vessels take from vessels.




噉者，餅果等。
Eating, such as cakes and fruits.

食者，五正食。
Food, the five proper meals.

若噉、若食，是比丘應向餘比丘悔過言：「長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。」
Whether eating or consuming, the monk should confess to other monks: "Elder! I have fallen into blameworthy ways, and I repent for this rule."

前人應問：「汝見罪不？」
The senior should ask: "Do you see your wrongdoing?"

答言：「見。」
He replies: "I do."

應語：「慎莫更作。」
He should say: "Be careful not to commit again."

答言：「頂戴持。」
He replies: "I will uphold it with respect."




波羅提提舍尼者，是罪向人發露不覆藏。
The offenses classified as "Pārājika" and "Pācittiya" must be disclosed to others without concealment.




送食，語餘比丘，餘比丘受無罪。  
If food is delivered for this monk and other monks are informed, the other monks are blameless.

若為是比丘送食，語是比丘，餘比丘受無罪。  
If food is delivered for this monk and the monk is informed, the other monks are blameless.

若為是比丘送食，語是比丘，是比丘受無罪。  
If food is delivered for this monk and the monk is informed, this monk is blameless.

若為餘比丘送食，語餘比丘，餘比丘受無罪。  
If food is delivered for other monks and the other monks are informed, they are blameless.

若送食先語：「有分數、無分數。」  
If before the food is delivered it is said: "There is a portion or not a portion,"

有分數者，比丘得在內，當憶種數，相應者取，不相應者語令還。  
If there is a portion, the monk may remain inside and should remember the type and number, take what is appropriate and tell to return what is not.

若有疏來者，看疏，相應取，不相應遣還。  
If a letter accompanies, read it and take what is appropriate and send back what is not.

若印封來者，看封印，完者取，不完者遣還。  
If there is a seal, inspect the seal and take what is intact and send back what is incomplete.

若先語無分數來者，當出精舍門外受。  
If it is first said that there is no portion, one should accept it outside the monastery gate.

若卒來入門者，不得受。  
If it suddenly arrives at the gate, it should not be accepted.

若有淨人，應語與淨人，若無淨人，語令放地，待淨人來，應語淨人：「持此食出外。」  
If there is a clean person, it should be told to the clean person. If there is no clean person, tell them to place it on the ground, wait for the clean person, and instruct the clean person: "Take this food outside."

出外已，比丘應受。  
Once outside, the monk should accept it.

若比丘病不能出外，內受無罪。  
If the monk is ill and cannot go outside, accepting inside is blameless.

若比丘親里持飲食到園，若池林中遊觀處，持食與比丘者，隨意受無罪。  
If the monk's relatives bring food to the park, or in the pool or forest for sightseeing, and give food to the monk, accepting it willingly is blameless.

若比丘道行時，作是念：「至某精舍當食。」過餘處食者，應悔過。  
If while traveling, a monk thinks: "I will eat when I reach a certain monastery," but eats elsewhere, he should regret it.

若至某精舍，值彼僧受請，隨去無罪。  
If he reaches a certain monastery and receives an invitation from those monks, accepting is blameless.

是故說。  
Therefore, it is said


佛住毘舍離，廣說如上。

The Buddha resided in Vaishali and elaborated as above.

尸利摩比丘尼因緣，應廣說，乃至佛語諸比丘：

Shilima Bhikkhuni's causation should be elaborated, even to the point where the Buddha said to the monks:

「我聲聞尼中福德第一尸利摩比丘尼。」

"Among my women disciples, Shilima Bhikkhuni is the foremost in virtue."

是時世飢儉，乞食難得。

At that time, the world was in famine, and it was difficult to obtain alms.

爾時尸利摩比丘尼時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入毘舍離城，次行乞食。

At that time, Shilima Bhikkhuni put on her village-entry robe and entered the city of Vaishali, sequentially begging for food.

見比丘即問言：「尊者！得食不？」

Upon seeing a monk, she asked, "Venerable! Did you obtain food?"

比丘即以空鉢示之。

The monk showed her an empty bowl.

比丘尼見已，作是念：「是我所尊而乞食不得。」

Upon seeing this, the bhikkhuni thought, "This is one I respect, yet he did not receive food."

便持己鉢中食與比丘。

She then offered the food from her bowl to the monk.

比丘得食還到精舍，喚餘比丘共食。

The monk, having received food, returned to the monastery and called other monks to share the meal.

諸比丘問言：「長老！何處得是好食？」

The other monks asked, "Elder! Where did you get such good food?"

答言：「尸利摩比丘尼邊得。」

He replied, "I got it from Shilima Bhikkhuni."

諸比丘聞已，各各往索。

Upon hearing this, the other monks each went to request.

如是次第，乃至五百比丘盡皆得食，然後自求。

In this order, up to five hundred monks all received food, and then she sought for herself.

日時已過，失食還到精舍。

The day had passed, and having missed her meal, she returned to the monastery.

明日晨朝諸比丘復著衣持鉢，至比丘尼精舍門立。

The next morning, the monks again donned their robes and holding their bowls, stood at the bhikkhuni's monastery gate.

比丘尼見已，即入語尸利摩言：「諸比丘今在門外相待。」

Upon seeing this, the bhikkhuni went in and said to Shilima, "The monks are waiting outside the gate."

尸利摩聞已，語弟子言：「取衣鉢來，我為諸上尊乞食。」

Upon hearing this, Shilima said to her disciple, "Bring the robe and bowl, I will beg food for the venerable ones."

如是次第供給五百人已，然後自求。

Thus, she supplied food to five hundred people in sequence, and then sought food for herself.

日時復過，失食而還。

Again the day passed, and having missed her meal, she returned.

至第三日亦復如是，乃至次第供給五百人，唯一人未得，此比丘隨尸利摩後入一家，

On the third day, it was also like this, until she supplied up to five hundred people, with one person not yet having received. This monk followed Shilima into a house.

以先三日失食故，身體虛羸迷悶倒地。

Due to having missed food for the previous three days, his body was weak, and he fainted and fell to the ground.

時諸婦人見已驚起欲扶，

The women present were startled upon seeing this and wanted to help him up.

比丘尼言：「住！住！待我思惟，何故倒地？」

The bhikkhuni said, "Stop! Stop! Let me reflect on why he fell."

即便憶念，為諸上尊乞食，自失食故悶極倒地。

She recalled that in begging for food for the venerable ones, she had missed her own meal, leading to fainting.

起已自拂拭塵土正衣服已，作是思惟：

Upon getting up, she dusted off her clothing and contemplated:




無上利。

Those who can give have supreme benefits.

憶念布施生歡喜心。

Recalling giving generates a joyful heart.

因歡喜故得清淨三昧，

Due to the joy, one attains pure concentration,

以三昧觀見五陰生滅，

and through concentration, observes the arising and ceasing of the five aggregates.

布施莊嚴心調伏諸根，

Giving adorns the mind and subdues the senses,

即入金剛三昧，

thus entering the diamond-like concentration,

盡一切漏，

exhausting all taints,

於佛法中三明作證。

and attests to the three insights in the Dharma.

尸利摩比丘尼得證已，

When the nun Shilimo attained certification,

爾時婦人將入洗浴已敷床令坐，

at that time, a woman prepared a bed after bathing, for the guest to sit,

然後與食。

and then provided food.

彼比丘故在門外立，

The monk stood outside the door on purpose,

婦人見已，

and the woman, upon seeing him,

恐復索食故，

afraid he would ask for food again,

當戶而立。

stood by the door.

比丘尼見遮戶，立心生疑，

The nun saw the blocked door and doubted,

何故遮戶？

wondering why the door was blocked.

傾頭看見比丘衣角，

She tilted her head and saw the corner of a monk's robe,

言：「是我上尊乞食不得。」

and said, "It is my superior who couldn't get alms."

即語言：「尊者！可入取食。」

Then she said, "Venerable! Please come in to take food."

婦人言：「阿尼且食，我當更求與之。」

The woman said, "Anini, just eat, I will seek to find more for him."

比丘尼言：「今世飢儉，何處更得？」

The nun said, "There is famine in this world, where can you get more?"

復持食與。

Still, she offered food.

婦人嫌言：

The woman complained,

「沙門釋子無有慈心，

"Monks, sons of the Shakyans, have no compassion,

云何三日失食飢極垂命，

how can they, after three days without food, be so hungry and fainting to death,

而復從索食？」

and still ask for food?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，

The monks reported this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼是諸比丘來。」

The Buddha said, "Call those monks to come."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」

When they came, the Buddha asked them thoroughly about the matter, "Is it true so?"

答言：「實爾。」

They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不聽白衣家內，

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, it is not allowed inside the household of laypeople,

非親里比丘尼邊自手取食。」

for a monk without kinship to personally take food from a nun."



舍離，廣說如上。
Further, the Buddha stayed in Vaisali and spoke extensively as above.

爾時尊者阿利吒身有瘡痍為人惡賤，人不與食。
At that time, Venerable Alīḥta had sores on his body, and people despised him, refusing to give him food.

每行乞食時，若未入門閉門不前，若已入門驅出不與。
Whenever he went begging for food, if he hadn't entered the door, they would close it and not let him approach; if he entered, they would drive him out without giving.

如來、應供、正遍知五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見阿利吒身有瘡痍。
For the benefit of five things of the Tathagata, the Worthy, the Fully Enlightened One, the Buddha visited the monks' quarters once every five days and saw that Alīḥta had sores on his body.

佛知而故問：「比丘！汝身力調和不？」
The Buddha, knowing this, asked, "Monk, is your body properly attuned?"

答言：「世尊！但患飢苦。」
He replied, "World-Honored One, I am only suffering from hunger."

佛問比丘：「汝不能乞食耶？」
The Buddha asked, "Can't you beg for food?"

答言：「世尊！我能乞食，但身體瘡痍人所惡賤。
He replied, "World-Honored One, I can beg for food, but because of the sores on my body, people despise me.

每行乞食，若未入門閉門不前，若得入門驅出不與。」
Whenever I beg for food, they close the door before I enter, and if I enter, they drive me out without giving.

佛言：「汝不能往尸利摩比丘尼邊乞食耶？」
The Buddha said, "Can't you go to the nun Srimala for food?"

答言：「世尊制戒，白衣家內非親里比丘尼邊，不得自手受食。
He replied, "The World-Honored One established the rule that in lay households, if the nun is not a relative, we cannot receive food directly from her.

彼非我親里，是故不往。」
She is not my relative, so I do not go."

佛言：「從今日後聽病比丘往。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, sick monks are allowed to go."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All those living depending on Vaisali should be gathered, and for the benefit of ten reasons, I'm establishing a rule for the monks, even those who have heard it should hear it again.

若比丘不病，白衣家內，非親里比丘尼邊自手受食，若噉、若食，是比丘應餘比丘邊悔過言：
If a monk is not sick and directly receives food from a nun who is not a relative in a lay household, whether eating it or chewing it, this monk should confess to another monk, saying:

『長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。』是名波羅提提舍尼法。」
'Elder, I have transgressed against the blameworthy rule; I confess this rule.' This is called the Pratidesaniya rule."



比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhus, as mentioned above.




非亲里者，非父亲、非母亲。

Those who are not our kin are neither our fathers nor our mothers.




病者，世尊說無罪，

Regarding those who are ill, the Blessed One said they are without fault,

不謂小小病，

it is not referring to minor illnesses,

謂疥黃、爛瘡、痍、癰痤人所惡賤，

but to severe afflictions like scabies, jaundice, ulcers, sores, and abscesses, which are despised and belittled by others,

是名為病。

this is what is referred to as illness.




白衣家內者，俗人家內。
The person in a white garment at home is an ordinary person at home.




比丘尼者，二部眾中受具足。
Bhikkhuni, fully ordained among the two assemblies.




自手受者，手從手受、器從器受。
Directly from the hand: the hand receives from the hand, the vessel receives from the vessel.




噉者，餅菓等。
Eater, pastries and the like.

食者，五正食。
Feeder, the five proper foods.

是比丘應向餘比丘悔過：「長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。」
This monk should confess to another monk: "Elder! I have violated a reprehensible rule, I confess this rule."

前人應問：「汝見罪不？」
The other should ask: "Do you see your fault?"

答言：「見。」
Reply: "I see."

應語：「慎莫更作。」
Should say: "Be careful not to do it again."

答言：「頂戴持。」
Reply: "I uphold and respect."




波羅提提舍尼者，如上說。  
Pārājika offenses are as explained above.  




，在俗人家內、非親里比丘尼邊，自手受食，受時，越比尼罪。
If the monk is not ill, and receives food in a layperson's house, beside an unrelated nun, by his own hand, he transgresses the rule during the reception.

食時，犯悔過法。
During the eating, he commits an offense of confession.

非親里非親里想受食者，犯悔過。
If he receives food thinking of someone unrelated as unrelated, he commits an offense of confession.

非親里疑想受食者，犯悔過。
If he receives food with doubt about someone being unrelated, he commits an offense of confession.

非親里親里想受食者，越比尼罪。
If he receives food thinking of someone unrelated as related, he transgresses the rule.

親里非親里想受食者，越比尼罪。
If he receives food thinking of someone related as unrelated, he transgresses the rule.

親里疑想受食者，越比尼罪。
If he receives food in doubt about someone related, he transgresses the rule.

親里親里想，無罪。
If he thinks of someone related as related, there is no offense.

為餘人受者，越比尼罪。
If he receives for another person, he transgresses the rule.

病人無罪、為病人受無罪、食病人殘無罪。
There is no offense if he is sick, if he receives for a sick person, or if he eats the remains of a sick person.

若式叉摩尼、沙彌尼持食來，語令放地，然後餘人邊受，無罪。
If a probationer or novice nun brings food, and he tells them to place it on the ground, then to receive it from another person, there is no offense.

比丘尼自持來，放地已，作是言：「尊者為我故受。」受者無罪。
If a nun brings it herself, and after placing it on the ground says, "Venerable, please receive it for me," the recipient is not guilty.

比丘尼住處受，無罪。
Receiving it at the nun's residence, there is no offense.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing at the Bamboo Grove Monastery in Rajagaha, and spoke extensively as mentioned above.

爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼知識家請僧食。
At that time, the nun Sundari Nanda invited the monks for a meal.

偷蘭難陀比丘尼，六群比丘前立，指示語檀越言：「與是比丘飯、與是比丘羹、與是比丘魚肉。」
The nun Sundari Nanda stood in front of the Group of Six monks and instructed the lay supporter, saying, "Give rice to this monk, curry to this monk, and fish to this monk."

檀越聞已，偏益六群比丘。
Upon hearing this, the lay supporter favored the Group of Six monks.

諸比丘嫌言：「云何六群比丘，受比丘尼偏教益食而不呵？」
The other monks complained, "Why do the Group of Six receive preferential instructions for food by a nun and go unrebuked?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call the Group of Six."

來已，佛問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked about the matter and said, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「汝云何受比丘尼偏教益食而不呵？」
The Buddha said, "Why do you accept preferential food instructions from a nun and remain unrebuked?"

佛告諸比丘：「依止王舍城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Let all those residing in Rajagaha gather. For ten benefits, I establish a precept for the monks, even if it has been heard before, it should be heard again."

若比丘白衣家內請食，比丘尼立指示言：『與是飯、與是羹魚肉。』
If a monk is invited for a meal at a layperson's house, and a nun instructs, "Give this rice, this curry, and fish."

諸比丘應語是比丘尼言：『姊妹！小住，待諸比丘食竟。』
The monks should say to the nun, "Sister, please wait until the monks have finished eating."

若諸比丘中乃至無一比丘語是比丘尼言：『姊妹！小住，待諸比丘食竟。』者，是諸比丘應向餘比丘邊悔過，如是言：『長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。』
If among the monks, no monk says to the nun, "Sister, please wait until the monks have finished eating," then those monks should confess the fault to another monk, saying, "Elder, I have transgressed the rule, please help me atone."

是名波羅提提舍尼法。
This is called the confession of a Parajika offense.




比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as mentioned above.




白衣家者，俗人家。
A family of white-clad, a commoner’s family.




請者，若今日、若明日。
The inviter, whether today or tomorrow.




食者，五正食、五雜正食。
Food refers to the five main foods and five auxiliary foods.




比丘尼者，二部眾中受具足。
Bhikkhuni refers to those who are fully ordained in the dual monastic community.




與者，益是飯、與是羹、與是魚肉。
For those present, there is rice, soup, and fish.




者，齊見聞知，應教作是言：「姊妹！小住，待諸比丘食竟。」

One should speak to the nun, seeing and hearing in unison, and instruct her to say: "Sister, please wait, let the monks finish eating."

若止者善，若不止者第二、第三語。

If she stops, it is good. If she does not stop, speak to her a second or third time.

若不語受者，越比尼罪。食者，犯悔過法。

If she does not listen, it is a transgression for nuns. Eating leads to violating the rule of expiation.

是比丘應向餘比丘邊悔過如是言：「長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。」

The monk should repent before other monks, saying: "Elder, I have fallen into a reproachable act, this act requires repentance."

前人應問：「汝見是罪不？」答言：「見。」

The elder should ask: "Do you see this as a sin?" The reply should be: "I do."

應語：「慎莫更作。」答言：「頂戴持。」

They should say: "Be careful not to do it again." The reply should be: "I will uphold this." 




波羅提提舍尼者，如上說。
A Pārājika offense, as stated above.




不滿三呵而食者，越比尼罪。   
Eating before three announcements is a transgression comparable to that of a nuns.  

滿三呵不止，食者無罪。   
If one refrains until after three announcements, there is no offense in eating.  

一人呵已，一切食無罪。   
Once one person has announced, everyone may eat without offense.  

不見不聞者，食者無罪。   
Those who do not see or hear are not at fault for eating.  

尼自作檀越，無罪。   
If the nun herself acts as the patron, it is not an offense.  

若檀越未曾請僧，不知儀法，爾時比丘尼得教安置形像教益食法，然後應坐。  
If the patron has never invited the monks and does not know the ritual, then the bhikkhuni can instruct on how to set up the representation and the beneficial eating practice before sitting.  

若不請，若非五正食，教無罪。   
If not invited, or if it is not one of the five proper foods, there is no offense in teaching.  

是故說。   
Therefore, it is said.  




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha lived in the city of Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

大臣毘闍因緣此中應廣說，乃至仙彌尼剎利。
Minister Visha's conditions should be explained here in detail, including the Sannyasa Kshatriya.

佛告諸比丘：「大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡。僧應為作學家羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks: "Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth. The Sangha should perform a Learning Assembly Karma."

羯磨法者，應作是說：「大德僧聽！大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡。若僧時到，僧為大臣毘闍作學家羯磨，白如是。」
The Karma procedure should be said: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth. If the time for the Sangha is suitable, the Sangha will perform a Learning Assembly Karma for Minister Visha; thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡。僧今為大臣毘闍作學家羯磨。諸大德忍與大臣毘闍作學家羯磨者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth. The Sangha now performs a Learning Assembly Karma for Minister Visha. Those venerable ones who agree to perform the Learning Assembly Karma for Minister Visha should remain silent, and those who do not agree should speak. This is the first karma."

第二、第三亦如是。
The second and third are likewise.

「僧已與大臣毘闍作學家羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has completed the Learning Assembly Karma for Minister Visha, and because the Sangha remained silent in agreement, this matter is thus upheld."

大臣毘闍乃至仙彌尼剎利還，疲極身蒙塵土，先問家中：「諸阿闍梨頗數來不？」
Minister Visha, including the Sannyasa Kshatriya, returned exhausted, covered in dust, and first asked at home, "Do the Acharyas come by often?"

答言：「來！但有所施時，一切不受。」
They replied, "They come! But whenever there is anything to give, they do not accept it."

毘闍聞已，心生不樂，竟不洗浴，往詣世尊頭面禮足，却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！諸比丘何故不受我家供養？」
Hearing this, Visha felt unhappy, did not bathe, and went to the World-Honored One, bowed with his head at his feet, withdrew to one side, and said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Why do the bhikkhus not accept my family's offerings?"

佛告毘闍：「汝布施太過，錢財竭盡，如來欲饒益故，為汝作學家羯磨。以是因緣，諸比丘不受汝施。」
The Buddha told Visha, "You were overly generous in giving, depleting your wealth. For the sake of your benefit, we performed a Learning Assembly Karma for you. Because of this reason, the bhikkhus do not accept your offerings."

毘闍即白佛言：「世尊！我家今者富於往昔三倍。唯願世尊！從今日已後聽諸比丘受我家施。」
Visha immediately said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! My family is now three times wealthier than before. I only wish, World-Honored One, that from today onwards the bhikkhus be allowed to accept my family's offerings."

佛告毘闍：「今是十五日，汝且還家，沐浴身體著新淨衣，與諸眷屬來詣眾僧，乞汝所願。」
The Buddha told Visha, "Today is the fifteenth day. You should go home, bathe, wear new clean clothes, and come with your family to the Sangha to make your request."

毘闍如教還，後佛告諸比丘：「毘闍本以布施太過，僧欲饒益故，作學家羯磨。毘闍今自說居業富足三倍於先，今欲從僧乞捨學家羯磨，僧應與捨。」
Visha returned as instructed, and later the Buddha told the monks, "Visha was overly generous in giving, so we performed a Learning Assembly Karma for his benefit. Now Visha claims his household affairs are three times more prosperous than before and wishes to request the Sangha to abandon the Learning Assembly Karma. The Sangha should grant this request."

毘闍歸家洗浴身體，易著新衣，與諸眷屬來入僧坊，具說上事。
Visha returned home, bathed, changed into new clothes, and came with his family to the Sangha's quarters, fully explaining the previous situation.

爾時僧與作捨學家羯磨。
Then the Sangha performed the Abandonment of Learning Assembly Karma.

應作求聽羯磨，如是說：「大德僧聽！大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡，僧欲饒益故，與作學家羯磨。
The request for the karma should be made, saying: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth, and the Sangha, wishing to benefit him, performed a Learning Assembly Karma.

而今財業富足，若僧時到，僧為大臣毘闍欲於僧中乞捨學家羯磨。」
Now, his finances are abundant. If the time for the Sangha is suitable, the Sangha will allow Minister Visha to request the abandonment of the Learning Assembly Karma."

「諸大德僧聽！大臣毘闍乞捨學家羯磨，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha requests the abandonment of the Learning Assembly Karma, and because the Sangha remained silent in agreement, this matter is upheld."

爾時大臣毘闍來，入僧中頭面禮足，胡跪合掌，如是白言：「大德僧聽！我毘闍先富後貧，僧憐愍故，與我作學家羯磨。
At that time, Minister Visha came, entered the Sangha, bowed with his head at their feet, knelt on one knee, put his palms together, and said: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! I, Visha, was wealthy before and later became poor. Enduring the Sangha's compassion, a Learning Assembly Karma was performed for me.

我今生業具足，三倍於前，今從僧乞捨學家羯磨，唯願僧與我捨學家羯磨。」
Now my livelihood is complete, three times more than before, and I request the sangha to abandon the Learning Assembly Karma for me. I only wish the sangha grant me the abandonment of the Learning Assembly Karma."

如是三乞。
He made this request three times.

爾時應置毘闍著眼見不聞處，
At that time, Visha was to be placed at a spot visible but out of hearing.

羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！是大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡，僧欲饒益故，與作學家羯磨。
The karma should be spoken as follows: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth; for his benefit, a Learning Assembly Karma was performed for him.

是毘闍自說家業具足三倍於先，已於僧中乞捨學家羯磨。若僧時到，僧今與毘闍捨學家羯磨。白如是。」
Visha himself says his household affairs are three times more prosperous than before; he has already requested within the Sangha to abandon the Learning Assembly Karma. If the time for the Sangha is suitable, the Sangha will now grant Visha the abandonment of the Learning Assembly Karma; thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！大臣毘闍布施太過，錢財竭盡，僧欲饒益故，與作學家羯磨。毘闍今自說家業具足三倍於前，已於僧中乞捨學家羯磨，僧今與毘闍捨學家羯磨。諸大德忍僧與毘闍捨學家羯磨默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable Sangha, please listen! Minister Visha was overly generous in giving, depleting his wealth. The Sangha performed a Learning Assembly Karma for his benefit. Visha now declares that his household affairs are three times more prosperous than before, and he has requested within the Sangha to abandon the Learning Assembly Karma. The Sangha now grants Visha the abandonment of the Learning Assembly Karma. Those who agree to grant the abandonment should remain silent, and those who do not agree should speak. This is the first karma."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third should be said similarly.

「僧已與毘闍捨學家羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has completed the abandonment of Learning Assembly Karma for Visha, and because the Sangha remained silent in agreement, this matter is upheld."

是捨學家羯磨，眾現前非徒眾現前。
It is the abandonment of Learning Assembly Karma, present publicly but not only in public.

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Have everyone residing in Shravasti gathered. For the sake of ten benefits, enforce the precepts among the bhikkhus, so that even those who have heard must hear again.

有諸學家僧作學家羯磨，比丘先不請而往，自手受食，若噉、若食，是比丘應向餘比丘邊悔過言：『長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。』是波羅提提舍尼法。」
There are certain monks practicing the Learning Assembly Karma. If a bhikkhu goes without invitation and accepts food himself, whether eating or consuming, he should confess this fault to another bhikkhu, saying, 'Elder! I have fallen into a censurable act; I confess this fault.' This is the Pratimoksha law."



學家者，婦須陀洹、夫斯陀含；

In learned families, the wife is a Srotapanna, and the husband is a Sakadagamin;

婦須陀洹、夫阿那含；

The wife is a Srotapanna, and the husband is an Anagamin;

婦斯陀含、夫須陀洹；

The wife is a Sakadagamin, and the husband is a Srotapanna;

婦斯陀含、夫阿那含；

The wife is a Sakadagamin, and the husband is an Anagamin;

婦阿那含、夫須陀洹；

The wife is an Anagamin, and the husband is a Srotapanna;

婦阿那含、夫斯陀含；

The wife is an Anagamin, and the husband is a Sakadagamin;

夫須陀洹、婦斯陀含；

The husband is a Srotapanna, and the wife is a Sakadagamin;

夫須陀洹、婦阿那含；

The husband is a Srotapanna, and the wife is an Anagamin;

夫斯陀含、婦須陀洹；

The husband is a Sakadagamin, and the wife is a Srotapanna;

夫斯陀含、婦阿那含；

The husband is a Sakadagamin, and the wife is an Anagamin;

夫阿那含、婦須陀洹；

The husband is an Anagamin, and the wife is a Srotapanna;

夫阿那含、婦斯陀含；

The husband is an Anagamin, and the wife is a Sakadagamin;

二俱須陀洹、二俱斯陀含、二俱阿那含。

Both are Srotapannas, both are Sakadagamins, both are Anagamins.




家者，四姓家：剎利家、婆羅門家、毘舍家、首陀羅家。
A household is of four castes: Kshatriya, Brahmin, Vaishya, Shudra.




比丘先不請者，

Bhikshu does not invite first,

先不請謂請想，

The one who does not invite first considers inviting,

請餘人謂己想。

inviting others is like considering oneself.



在过去，无论是在家中，还是在园里，或是在田里。

In the past, whether at home, in the garden, or in the field.




自手取者，手從手受、器從器受。
Those who take with their hands, receive from hands, and vessels receive from vessels.




蛋糕和餅乾之類的。

Items such as cakes and cookies.




食者，五正食。
One who eats should have five proper meals.

是比丘應向餘比丘邊悔過如是言：
This monk should confess to another monk with such words:

「長老！我墮可呵法，此法悔過。」
"Elder! I have transgressed a rule deserving censure, and I confess my mistake."

前人應問：「汝自見罪不？」
The one before should ask: "Do you see your fault?"

答言：「見。」
He should answer: "I see."

應語：「莫更犯。」
He should say: "Do not commit it again."

答言：「頂戴持。」
He should answer: "I will uphold it with reverence."



波羅提提舍尼者，如上說。
The Prātimokṣa rules are as described above.




家羯磨者，不得如烏鳥避射方絕不往，應時時往看，為說法、論法事。  
If a monk has undertaken the duties of a student's practice, he should not completely avoid it like a bird avoiding an arrow, but should visit from time to time, to speak about the Dharma and discuss matters of the Dharma.

若學家欲布施者，應語：「且置汝邊，我自知時。」  
If a student wishes to make offerings, he should be told: "Put it aside, I will know the time."

若先請僧後作羯磨，不得取大價重物，得取小小輕物。  
If an offering is made to the monks first and then a practice is undertaken, one should not take expensive or heavy items, but may take small and light items.

若學家言：「尊者何故不受是施，謂我貧耶？」  
If the student says: "Honored one, why do you not accept this offering, do you think I am poor?"

爾時應語：「汝不貧，如世尊所說，須陀洹人成就四法，於聲聞中最為大富。  
Then it should be said: "You are not poor, as the Blessed One has said, one who achieves the four fruits of a stream-enterer is most prosperous among the hearers.

何等四？一者於如來、應供、正遍知生堅固信根，沙門婆羅門諸天世人所不能壞。  
What are the four? First, a firm root of faith in the Tathagata, the worthy one, the fully awakened one, which cannot be destroyed by any ascetic, brahmin, god, or human.

二者於法生堅固信根，三者於僧中生堅固信根，四者於戒生堅固信根，沙門婆羅門諸天世人所不能壞。  
Second, a firm root of faith in the Dharma; third, a firm root of faith in the Sangha; fourth, a firm root of faith in morality, which cannot be destroyed by any ascetic, brahmin, god, or human.

是名四法成就，如來聲聞中不貧最為大富。」  
These are called the achievements of the four laws, the most prosperous among the Tathagata's hearers who are not poor."

若來精舍中飯僧作眾供養及非時漿者，不得捨去，當佐敷床褥施供養具，應為受用已，廣為說法。  
If you come to the monastery to feed the monks or make additional offerings, you should not leave immediately. You should help arrange beddings and offerings for the monks, and after using them, extensively speak about the Dharma.

是故說。  
Thus it is said.



住在阿兰若处，  
Dwell in a secluded place,

没有疾病接受尼食，  
Receive alms without illness,




比丘尼指授、 
The bhikshuni gives guidance,

羯磨學家食，
The ritual specialist takes food,




四悔過法竟。  
The four regret-remorse practices are complete.




明眾學法之初
At the beginning when the public understands the learning of the Dharma




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and preached extensively as described above.

爾時六群比丘下著內衣、高著內衣、參差著內衣、百襵著內衣、石榴花著內衣、麥飯團著內衣、魚尾著內衣、多羅樹葉著內衣、象鼻著內衣。
At that time, six groups of monks wore their inner robes in various styles: low, high, uneven, with many folds, like pomegranate flowers, like barley balls, like fish tails, like palmyra leaves, and like elephant trunks.

下者，齊踝。
The low style reached down to the ankles.

高者，齊膝。
The high style reached up to the knees.

參差者，不齊正。
The uneven style was irregular.

百襵者，多作襵。
The style with many folds had numerous pleats.

石榴花者，一邊花奄。
The pomegranate flower style flared on one side.

麥飯團者，總頭如麥飯團。
The barley ball style gathered at the top like a barley ball.

魚尾者，垂兩角似魚尾。
The fish tail style hung with two corners like a fish's tail.

多羅樹葉者，壠起如多羅樹葉。
The palmyra leaf style rose with ridges like palmyra leaves.

象鼻者，一角偏垂。
The elephant trunk style hung down on one side.

如是過故，為世人所譏：「看沙門釋子著衣，如王子、大臣、婬欲人，如是高下參差，乃至象鼻。
Because of these excesses, they were criticized by the people: "Look at the monks, dressed like princes, ministers, or lustful people, with robes high, low, uneven, even like elephant trunks.

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
These are ruinous people, what path are they following?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, having heard this, reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來」來已，佛問：「比丘！汝實爾不？」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here." When they came, the Buddha asked, "Monks, is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「汝云何高下乃至象鼻著內衣，為世俗人所譏？
The Buddha said, "Why do you wear your inner robes in various styles, even like elephant trunks, and suffer criticism from the laypeople?

從今日後不聽如是著內衣。」
From today onward, such wearing of inner robes is not approved."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All residing in the city of Shravasti must assemble."

集已，佛於僧前自著內衣，告諸比丘：「汝等當如是著內衣，如淨居天法，屈右邊、襵左邊著內衣。
When assembled, the Buddha donned his inner robe before the monks and said, "You should wear your inner robes like this, according to the practices of the Pure Abodes, folding the right side and pleating the left side.

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
For the ten benefits, I lay down this rule for the monks, and those who have heard it shall hear it again.

齊整著內衣，應當學。」
Wear your inner robes neatly and properly; this is how you should learn."



齊整著內衣時，不得如纏軸，當反執右邊、執左邊上角屈著內，應齊整著。
When putting on inner clothes neatly, do not wrap them like a roll; fold the right edge and the upper left corner inward, and wear them neatly.

不得如婬女法賣色左右顧視為好不好，應看令如法齊整著。
Do not look around as if to appeal with beauty like a courtesan; ensure that it is worn properly and neatly.

若放恣諸根不欲學齊整著內衣者，越學法。
If one indulges the senses and refuses to learn wearing inner clothes properly, it violates the learning rules.

狂、癡、心亂，無罪。
Madness, foolishness, and mind chaos are not considered offences.

是故說，齊整著內衣，應當學。
Therefore, it is said that one should learn how to wear inner clothes neatly.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Savatthi and expounded as above.

爾時六群比丘下被衣、高被衣、婆羅天被衣、婆藪天被衣。
At that time, the six groups of monks wore their robes low, high, like Brahma, or like Parsvadeva.

下被衣者，齊踝。
To wear the robe low is to have it even with the ankles.

高被衣者，齊膝。
To wear the robe high is to have it even with the knees.

婆羅天被衣者，衣加頂上，從兩腋下外出，是名婆羅天被衣。
To wear the robe like Brahma is to place it over the head, with it coming out from under both armpits; this is called wearing the robe like Brahma.

婆藪天被衣者，衣加背上，從兩腋下入挑著兩肩上，是名婆藪天被衣。
To wear it like Parsvadeva is to place it over the back, with it going in under both armpits and over both shoulders; this is called wearing the robe like Parsvadeva.

如是過故為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如王、大臣、童子、貴樂人，如是高被衣、下被衣？
Thus, they were criticized by the people: "How is it that renunciants, sons of the Shakya, dress like kings, ministers, boys, or noble entertainers, wearing their robes high or low?

此壞敗人，為有何道？」
These ruined people, what kind of path do they follow?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks heard this and went to the Blessed One for this reason.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said: "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks: "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered: "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今日後不聽高下被衣，乃至婆藪天被衣，當齊整被衣。」
The Buddha said: "From this day forward, you are not to wear your robes high or low, nor like Brahma or Parsvadeva. You are to wear your robes properly."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "Gather all those residing near the city of Savatthi. For the ten benefits, a rule is established for the monks, and even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

齊整被衣，應當學。」
Wear your robes properly; this you should learn.


齊整被衣時不得如纏軸，

When putting on clothes neatly, it should not be like winding a spool,

應當通肩被著紐，

You should apply buttons over the shoulders,

齊兩角左手捉，

Hold both corners evenly with your left hand,

捉時不得手中出角頭如羊耳，

When holding, the corner should not protrude from your hand like a sheep's ear,

不得如婬女賣色法，左右顧視為好不好？

Should not be like a lewd woman selling her looks, glancing around to see if it is good or not?

應看如法齊整不高不下。

You should ensure it is proper, neat, neither too high nor too low.

若泥時手得抄舉，

If muddy, hands may be raised,

若放恣諸根不如法被衣者，越學法。

If one lets the senses run wild, clothes improperly arranged, one transgresses the practice.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。

Madness, folly, or a disordered mind is not a sin.

是故說，齊整被衣，應當學。

Therefore it is said, dressing neatly is something that should be learned.




，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti, expounding as above.

爾時難陀、優婆難陀，著細生疎衣，形體露現。
At that time, Nanda and Upananda wore thin, coarse clothes, with their bodies exposed.

又復六群比丘著垢膩破衣，腰脇背肘露現，共入檀越家，為世人所嫌：
Moreover, a group of six monks wore dirty, tattered clothes, with their waists, sides, backs, and elbows exposed, entering donor's homes, which was frowned upon by the people:

「看沙門釋子如王、大臣，著細生疎衣，形體露現。」
"See the Shakya monks dressed like kings or ministers, in thin, coarse clothes, with their bodies exposed."

見著弊衣者作是言：
Those who saw them in ragged clothes said:

「看沙門釋子，著如是衣服，形體露現，似如奴僕客作賤人入家內。此壞敗人，為有何道？」
"See the Shakya monks, wearing such clothes, with their bodies exposed, like slaves or lowly people entering a home. What path do these corrupted people follow?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, having heard this, went to report the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後當好覆身入家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, you should cover your body well before entering a house."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all who abide in the city of Shravasti; thus, I establish a precept for the benefit of the ten advantages for monks, and even those who have heard before should hear again."

好覆身入家內，應當學。
You should learn to cover your body well before entering a house.



若作安陀會，當用緻物作；
If making an Antarvāsaka (inner robe), one should use fine materials;

若疎者，當兩重三重作。
If it is coarse, it should be made double or triple layered.

若安陀會疎者，欝多羅僧當用緻物作。
If the Antarvāsaka is coarse, the Uttarasanga (upper robe) should be made of fine material.

若欝多羅僧疎者，僧伽梨當用緻物作。
If the Uttarasanga is coarse, the Sanghati (outer robe) should be made of fine material.

若放恣諸根不好覆身入家內者，越學法。
If one indulgently enters a house without properly covering the body, it violates the study discipline.

若狂、癡、心亂無罪。
If one is mad, ignorant, or mentally disturbed, there is no offense.

是故說，好覆身入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, one should learn to properly cover the body before entering a house.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and preached extensively as above.

爾時六群比丘入白衣舍，
At that time, six groups of monks entered the homes of laypeople,

看象、看馬、看駱駝、看鳥、看伎兒歌舞，
to watch elephants, horses, camels, birds, and enjoy performers' songs and dances,

為世人所譏：
and were criticized by the people,

「云何沙門釋子東西顧視如似細作？」
"Why do the ascetic followers of Shakya look around here and there like craftsmen?"

問言：「尊者為失何物？
They were asked, "Venerable ones, what have you lost?

左右顧視，如有所覓。
You look around as if searching for something.

出家之人應諦視入家內。
The renunciates should focus their gaze inward.

此壞敗人，為有何道？」
What is the teaching for those who are on the wrong path?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Summon the six groups of monks."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked them, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今日後當諦視入家內。」
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, focus your gaze inward."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in the city of Shravasti should gather,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
for the ten benefits, I will establish a rule for the monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。
even those who have heard it should hear it again.

諦視入家內，應當學。」
Focus your gaze inward; this should be learned."



諦視行時不得如馬低頭行，當平視行，防惡象馬牛，
When walking, do not lower your head like a horse; walk with a straight view to guard against malicious elephants, horses, and oxen.

當如擔輦人行，不得東西視瞻。
Walk like a palanquin bearer, do not look around aimlessly.

若欲看時，迴身向所看處。
If you wish to look at something, turn your body toward it.

若放恣諸根，不學諦視入家內者，越學法。
If you indulge the senses without learning to observe carefully and re-enter the household, you deviate from the practice.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
Madness, folly, and mental disorder are not sins.

是故說，諦視入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said that observing carefully upon returning to the home should be practiced.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and explained as above.

爾時六群比丘高聲大喚入白衣家內。
At that time, six groups of monks entered the homes of laypeople with loud voices.

為世人所譏，作是言：「尊者如賈客失伴，如放牧人高聲大喚。」
They were criticized by the people of the world, saying, "You monks are like merchants who have lost their companions, like shepherds who call out loudly."

汝出家人應小聲入家內。此壞敗人，為有何道？」
"You, who have renounced the world, should enter homes quietly. What path is there for those who are destructive?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, due to this matter, went to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six groups of monks."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後當小聲入家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, enter homes quietly."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha instructed the monks, "Everyone residing in the city of Shravasti should gather; for the sake of ten benefits, I will establish rules for the monks, and even those who have heard should hear again."

小聲入家內，應當學。
Entering homes quietly should be learned.



不得高聲大喚入家內，若欲喚時應彈指。
One should not loudly shout upon entering the house; if calling is necessary, one should snap their fingers.

若前人不聞者，應語比坐。
If those ahead do not hear, one should speak to their companions.

若放恣諸根，不學小聲行入家內者，越學法。
If one indulges their senses and does not learn to enter the house quietly, they transgress the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
There is no offense for those who are mad, foolish, or mentally disturbed.

是故說，小聲入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said that learning to enter the house quietly is necessary.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha dwelled in Shravasti and gave an extensive teaching as above.

爾時六群比丘共調戲語笑入白衣家內，為世人所譏：
At that time, six groups of monks were joking and laughing as they entered laypeople's homes, and were criticized by the world:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、婬欲放逸人，共相調戲語笑入內？」
"How can the monks, disciples of the Shakya, behave like princes, ministers, or indulgent libertines, joking and laughing as they enter inside?"

問言：「尊者何故現齗，欲賣齒耶？
They asked, "Venerable, why do you show your teeth; do you want to sell them?"

此中亦無伎兒，為笑何等？此壞敗人，為有何道？」
There are no entertainers here, so what is there to laugh about? These are corrupting people, what way is this?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks went to inform the Blessed One of this matter.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks to come."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
Once they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「汝云何於聖人毘尼中，現齗而笑相與調戲？」
The Buddha said, "How can you, within the sacred Vinaya, show your teeth and joke with each other?"

從今日後不得戲笑入家內。
From today onward, you should not joke and laugh as you enter homes.

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in Shravasti must gather, and for the ten benefits, I will lay down a rule for the monks, even those who have already heard must hear again.

不得笑入家內，應當學。」
You should not laugh as you enter homes, and this should be learned."



不得笑，若有可笑事者，不得出齗現齒呵呵而笑，應制忍之。  
Do not laugh; if there is something funny, do not laugh showing your teeth, you should control and endure it.

當起無常苦空無我想、思惟死想。  
You should think of impermanence, suffering, emptiness, non-self, and contemplate death.

若不可止，當自齧舌。  
If you cannot stop, you should bite your own tongue.

若復不能止者，當以衣角遮口徐徐抑制。  
If you still cannot stop, you should cover your mouth with the corner of your clothes and gently suppress.

若放恣諸根，大笑入家內者，越學法。  
If you let your senses loose and laugh loudly at home, you violate the learning of the dharma.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。  
Madness, folly, and mental confusion are not crimes.

是故說，不得笑入家內，應當學。  
Therefore, it is said that one should not laugh at home, and should learn.




，廣說如上。  
Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī, expounding extensively as described above.

爾時六群比丘覆頭入白衣家內，為世人所譏：  
At that time, a group of six monks entered the homes of laypeople with their heads covered, and were criticized by the public:

「云何沙門釋子如放逸婬女、如賊細作、如新婦、如採蜜人，覆頭行入家內？」  
"Why do the renunciates, sons of the Shakyans, enter houses with their heads covered like promiscuous women, like sneaky thieves, like brides, or like those who collect honey?"

問言：「尊者！患眼痛耶？畏日炙頭耶？何故覆頭？此壞敗人，何道之有？」  
They were asked: "Venerables! Do you have sore eyes? Are you afraid of the sun scorching your head? Why do you cover your heads? Such behavior is corruptive, what doctrine supports it?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。  
Because of this situation, the monks went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」  
The Buddha said, "Call those six groups of monks here."

佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」  
The Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」  
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得覆頭入白衣家內。」  
The Buddha said, "From this day forth, you are not to enter laypeople's houses with your heads covered."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "All who reside in the city of Śrāvastī should gather, for the benefit of ten things a precept is established for monks, even those who have heard should hear again.

不得覆頭入家內，應當學。」  
You must not enter houses with your heads covered; this is to be learned." 




覆頭者，盡覆及兩耳，不得覆頭行入白衣家。
Those who cover their heads fully including both ears should not enter the household of laypeople with a covered head.

若大寒雨雪患頭風，得覆半頭一耳。
If there is severe cold, rain, snow, or a head cold, one may cover half the head and one ear.

若放恣諸根，覆頭入家內者，越學法。
If one indulges the senses and enters the house with a covered head, it violates the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
There is no offense for those who are insane, foolish, or confused in mind.

是故說，不得覆頭入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said that one should learn not to enter a house with a covered head.



，廣說如上。

The Buddha resided in the city of Savatthi and spoke extensively as above.

爾時六群比丘反抄衣入白衣家，為世人所譏：

At that time, six groups of monks pulled up their robes and entered the homes of laypeople, criticized by the worldly people:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣，如婬妷女人賣色，反抄衣入人家內坐，露現肘脇？」

"How can the followers of the ascetic Shakyamuni, like princes and ministers, like licentious women selling their charms, pull up their robes and sit in people's homes, exposing their elbows and sides?"

問言：「尊者！欲來共鬪耶？何故反抄衣現脇。此壞敗人，為有何道？」

They asked, "Venerable Sir! Do you wish to fight with us? Why do you pull up your robe and expose your sides? What path leads to such decay and ruin?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to the Blessed One to report.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」

The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

When they had come, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」

They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得反抄衣入家內。」

The Buddha said, "From this day onward, do not pull up your robes and enter a house."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "All who dwell relying on the city of Savatthi should gather. For the sake of ten benefits, I establish a rule for the monks, and even those who have heard it should hear it again.

不得反抄衣入家內，應當學。」

Do not pull up your robes and enter a house; you should learn this.


抄衣者，兩邊反抄著肩上。  
For those who drape their robes, both sides are to be draped over the shoulders.

不得反抄衣行入家內，若風雨時得抄一邊，若偏袒右肩得抄左邊，若通肩被得抄右邊，不得令肘現。  
Do not enter the house with the robe draped over reversed shoulders; during wind or rain, drape one side. If the right shoulder is exposed, cover the left side, if the entire shoulder is covered, it must cover the right side, do not let the elbow show.

乞食時畏污衣故得反抄，肘不現無罪。  
While begging for food, reverse draping is allowed to avoid soiling the robes, and there is no offense if the elbow is not exposed.

若放恣諸根，反抄衣入家內者，越學法。  
If one indulges the senses and enters the house with the robe draped over reversed shoulders, it violates the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。  
If one is mad, insane, or mentally disturbed, there is no offense.

是故說，不得反抄衣入家內，應當學。  
Thus, it is said, do not wear the robe with reversed draping into the house, this should be learned.




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha lived in Śrāvastī, explaining widely as above.

爾時六群比丘脚指行入白衣家，
At that time, six groups of monks entered the layperson's home on their toes,

為世人所譏：
and were ridiculed by the laypeople:

「云何沙門釋子如婬女偷人，如蝦蟇行？
"How can monks, disciples of Śākya, act like prostitutes sneaking around, like frogs?

此壞敗人，為有何道？」
What kind of conduct is this that degrades people?"

諸比丘聞已以是因緣往白世尊。
Upon hearing this, the monks reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：
The Buddha said:

「呼六群比丘來。」
"Call those six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得脚指行入白衣家。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, you should not enter laypeople's homes on your toes."

佛告諸比丘：
The Buddha told the monks:

「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
"All who reside in Śrāvastī should be gathered,"

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
because for ten benefits, I am establishing a rule for the monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。
so that those who have heard before may hear again.

不得脚指行入家內，應當學。」
Do not enter a house on your toes; you should learn this.

入內若埿水時，
When entering a muddy area inside,

不得先下脚指後下脚跟，
you should not put your toes down first, then heels;

當先下脚跟然後下脚指。
instead, place your heels down first, then your toes.

若脚心有瘡當側脚行，
If there is a sore on the sole, walk sideways,

作蔽瘡物繫之，
use something to cover the sore and bind it,

先下脚跟後下脚指。
first place the heel down, then the toes.

若放恣諸根，
If you indulge your senses,

不學平脚行者，越學法。
and do not learn to walk properly, it is a transgression of the practice.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
There is no offense for the insane, foolish, or disturbed.

是故說，
Therefore it is said,

不得脚指行入家內，應當學。
do not enter a house on your toes; you should learn this.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and extensively taught as mentioned above.

爾時六群比丘叉腰入白衣家，為世人所譏：
At that time, six groups of monks entered lay people's homes with arms akimbo, and were criticized by the public:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、力士，叉腰入人家內？
"Why do Shakyamuni's disciples, like princes, ministers, or warriors, enter people's homes with arms akimbo?

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
This is disgraceful behavior; how can they claim to follow the path?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this situation to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After their arrival, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「此是惡事，從今日後不得叉腰入白衣家。」
The Buddha said, "This is wrong, from today on you must not enter the homes of laypeople with arms akimbo."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha instructed all monks residing in Shravasti to gather, saying, "For ten benefits, I shall ordain a precept for all monks, including those who have previously heard it.

不得叉腰入家內，應當學。」
You must not enter homes with arms akimbo; this should be learned."

叉腰者，兩手叉腰。
To have arms akimbo means placing both hands on the hips.

不得叉腰行入家內，若腰脊痛、若風腫者，得叉腰無罪。
You must not walk into homes with arms akimbo, but if you have a backache or edema, then it is not an offense to do so.

若癰瘡癬以藥塗上，畏污衣故，叉腰無罪。
If there are abscesses or sores treated with medicine, to avoid staining clothes, having arms akimbo is not an offense.

若放恣諸根，叉腰入家內者，越學法。
If one enters homes with arms akimbo due to unrestrained senses, it violates the learning code.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
Insanity, foolishness, or mental turmoil incurs no offense.

是故說，不得叉腰入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, you should not enter homes with arms akimbo; this should be learned.



內衣被上服、  
Underwear is covered by outer garments,

好覆諦視入、  
Look closely to see clearly,




禁止悄悄地笑，    轻轻掀起衣服，

No whispering with laughter, gently lift the clothes,

反复翻过头去，    偷偷抄写。

Repeatedly turn your head, secretly copying.



指行及叉腰
Pointing and putting hands on hips

學初跋渠竟
Learning began, crossing the river finally



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha resided in Śrāvastī, elaborating as above.

爾時六群比丘搖身入白衣家，為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、婬女，搖身入家內？
At that time, six groups of monks entered laypeople’s homes with swaying bodies and were ridiculed by people: "How can the Śākyaputra monks, like princes, ministers, or prostitutes, enter homes swaying their bodies?

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
This is disgraceful behavior, how can there be any path?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks informed the Blessed One of this matter.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked the monks: "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Indeed it is."

佛言：「從今以後不得搖身入家內。」
The Buddha said, "From now on, you must not enter homes swaying your bodies."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "All who reside in Śrāvastī should gather, to establish a rule for the ten benefits of the monks, even those who have heard it should hear again.

不得搖身入家內，應當學。」
You must not enter homes with swaying bodies, and should learn this."



若老病身振、風雨寒雪振搖無罪。
If the elderly or sick are shaking, or shaking due to wind and rain, cold and snow, there is no offense.

若放恣諸根搖身入家內者，越學法。
If one enters the house with unrestrained senses, swaying their body, it violates the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
If you are mad, confused, or mentally disturbed, there is no offense.

是故說，不得搖身入家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, one should learn not to enter the house swaying the body.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in Śrāvastī and extensively expounded as above.

爾時六群比丘搖頭入白衣家內，
At that time, a group of six monks shook their heads as they entered the layperson's home,

為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如婬妷人、如鼠、如狼，振動頭入家內？
causing people to criticize: "How can followers of the Buddha act like immoral people, like mice, like wolves, shaking their heads as they enter homes?

此壞敗人，有何道法？」
These disrespectful acts—what kind of doctrine do they follow?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Because of this incident, the monks went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six monks to come."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得搖頭入白衣家。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, do not shake your head when entering a layperson's home."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
The Buddha told the monks, "All those staying in Śrāvastī should gather together,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
for the benefit of ten virtues, I will establish precepts for the monks, so that even those who have heard them should listen again.

不得搖頭行入家內，應當學。」
Do not shake your head when entering a home; you should learn this."



若老羸病、若痏頭、若風雨寒振搖頭無罪。
If one is old, weak, or ill, or if one's head is injured, or if shaken by the wind, rain, or cold, there is no offense in shaking the head.

若放恣諸根，搖頭入家內者，越學法。
If one indulges the senses and enters a household shaking the head, this transgresses the rules of discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
For those who are insane, foolish, or mentally disturbed, there is no offense.

是故說，不得搖頭入家內，應當學。
Thus, it is said, one should not shake the head while entering a household; this should be learned.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining in detail as above.

爾時六群比丘掉臂入白衣家，撥觸檀越面、破他手中酥油瓶器，為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如力士兇人，掉臂入家內？
At that time, six groups of monks swung their arms while entering a layperson's house, striking the donor's face and breaking the ghee container in his hand, which led to people's criticism: "Why do these followers of the Sakyan ascetic act like violent warriors, swinging their arms while entering houses?

此壞敗人，有何道法？」
What kind of teachings do such destructive individuals practice?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks went to inform the Blessed One of this incident.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said: "Summon those six groups of monks."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks: "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered: "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得掉臂入白衣家內。」
The Buddha said: "From today onwards, you are not allowed to swing your arms when entering laypeople's houses."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha addressed the monks: "All those residing in the city of Śrāvastī should gather. For these ten benefits, I will establish a rule for the monks, and even those who have already heard it should hear it again.

不得掉臂入家內，應當學。」
Do not swing your arms when entering a house; this is something you should learn.


不得掉臂行入家內，

Do not walk into the house with swinging arms,

若先是王子大臣本習未除，

If a prince or minister has not eliminated their habitual behaviors,

應當教言：「汝今出家，當捨此俗儀，從比丘法。」

they should be taught: "Now that you have left home, you should abandon these worldly manners and follow the monk's regulations."

若欲喚人，不得雙舉兩手，當以一手招。

When calling someone, do not raise both hands, but use one hand to beckon.

若放恣諸根，掉臂入家內者，越學法。

If one indulges their senses or enters a house with swinging arms, they violate the disciplinary regulations.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。

Being crazy, foolish, or mentally disturbed are not offenses.

是故說，不得掉臂入家內，應當學。

Therefore, it is said, do not enter a house with swinging arms, and this should be learned.



住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

爾時六群比丘著垢膩破衣，露肘腰脇。
At that time, a group of six monks wore dirty and torn clothes, exposing their elbows and waists.

難陀、優波難陀著細生疎衣，形體露現，共白衣家坐，為世人所譏：
Nanda and Upananda wore thin, loose clothes, revealing their bodies, and sat with laypeople, criticized by the public:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、貴人，著細生疎衣？」
"Why do ascetics, the sons of Shakya, dress like princes, ministers, and nobles, wearing thin and loose clothes?"

見著弊衣者，復言：「似如奴僕客作賤人，著破壞垢衣，肘脇露現坐家內。」
Seeing those in tattered clothes, they further said, "It looks like slaves and servants wearing ruined dirty clothes, with exposed elbows and waists, sitting inside homes."

沙門釋子應好覆身坐家內。
The ascetic sons of Shakya should cover themselves well when sitting inside homes.

此壞敗人，有何道法？」
What kind of discipline does this ruined person have?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the group of six monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
Once they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後應好覆身坐家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, you should cover yourselves well when sitting inside homes."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all who are staying in the city of Shravasti, for the sake of ten benefits, to prescribe this precept to the monks, and even those who have heard it should hear it again.

好覆身坐家內，應當學。」
You should learn to cover yourselves well when sitting inside homes."



好覆身者，應用緻物作內衣；
Those who cover themselves well should use a dense cloth for inner garments.

若用疎物者，應兩重三重。
If using a loose cloth, it should be two or three layers.

若內衣疎者，欝多羅僧應用緻物。
If the inner garment is loose, the upper robe should use a dense cloth.

欝多羅僧疎者，僧伽梨應用緻物。
If the upper robe is loose, the double-layered robe should use a dense cloth.

僧伽梨疎者，欝多羅僧應用緻物。
If the double-layered robe is loose, the upper robe should use a dense cloth.

坐時不得坐衣上，
When sitting, do not sit on the robe.

當一手褰衣、一手案坐具，
One hand should lift the robe, the other should handle the sitting mat,

然後安詳而坐。
then sit gracefully.

若精舍中食上和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前，
If eating in the monastery in front of the elder monks, teachers, and senior bhikkhus,

應好覆身坐。
one should sit with a well-covered body.

若放恣諸根，不學好覆身家內坐者，
If one indulges the senses and does not learn to sit with a well-covered body at home,

越學法。
one is transgressing the teachings. 

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
Insanity, foolishness, or a disturbed mind is not guilty.

是故說，
Therefore it is said,

好覆身家內坐，應當學。
one should learn to sit with a well-covered body at home.



，廣說如上。

The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and expounded on the teachings as mentioned above.

爾時六群比丘入白衣家內坐，看他婦女、小兒行來出入上閣、下閣，為世人所譏：

At that time, six groups of monks entered laypeople's homes and sat, watching women and children going in and out of the house, which led to worldly reproach:

「云何沙門釋子如婬妷人、如盜賊，在他家內坐看他婦女？」

"How can the sons of Shakya, as ascetics, behave like lustful people or thieves, sitting in others' homes watching their women?"

問言：「尊者！為失何物，東西顧視？

They asked, "Venerable ones! What have you lost that you look around here and there?

出家之人應諦視坐家內。此壞敗人，有何道法？」

Those who have renounced should attentively observe and sit at home. What kind of path or practice is this of a corrupt person?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

For this reason, the monks went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks." After they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」

They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後應諦視坐家內。」

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, you should attentively observe and sit at home."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」

The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in the city of Shravasti should come together. For the sake of ten benefits, I prescribe a rule for the monks. Even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

諦視坐家內，應當學。」

Attentively observe and sit at home; this should be learned.


諦視家內坐時，不得如馬延頸低視，當平視，勿令不覺檀越持熱器來湯突手面。
When sitting inside the house and observing attentively, do not extend your neck and look down like a horse; you should look straight ahead, so as not to be unaware when the benefactor brings a hot vessel that might scald your hands and face.

若精舍中食上、若在和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前坐時，不得左右顧視，當平視坐。
Whether at the food offering in the monastery, or sitting in front of the mentor, teacher, or elder monks, do not look around sideways but sit looking straight ahead.

若放恣諸根，不諦視坐家內者，越學法。
If one indulges the senses and does not sit observing attentively inside the house, he transgresses the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
There is no offense for those who are insane, foolish, or mentally disturbed.

是故說，諦視坐家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said that one should learn to sit observing attentively inside the house.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, elaborating as above.

爾時六群比丘入白衣家內坐，高聲大喚共相嘲話，為世人所譏：
At that time, six groups of monks entered the homes of laypeople, sitting with loud voices, teasing each other, and were ridiculed by the public:

「云何沙門釋子高聲大喚，如商人失伴，如放牧人大喚。」
"How can the disciples of the Shakyamuni scream loudly, like merchants losing their companions or shepherds calling out?"

問言：「尊者！何故大喚？出家之人應小聲坐。云何大喚？此壞敗人，有何道法？」
They were asked, "Honored ones! Why are you shouting? Those who have renounced should sit quietly. How can you shout? This is destructive, what kind of discipline is this?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, because of this reason, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
Upon their arrival, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後應小聲坐家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, you should sit quietly inside homes."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in the city of Śrāvastī should gather, for the sake of ten benefits, I will establish a precept for the monks; even those who have heard should hear again."

小聲坐家內，應當學。
One should learn to sit quietly inside homes.

不得高聲大喚坐家內，若欲喚者，應彈指。
Do not shout loudly inside homes; if you wish to call someone, you should snap your fingers.

若前人不覺者，當語近邊人。
If the person ahead does not notice, you should speak to someone nearby.

若精舍中食上、若和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前坐，不得高聲大喚。
If sitting in front of food in the monastery, the abbot, the teacher, or elder monks, you should not shout loudly.

若欲語時，語比坐，如是展轉第二、第三，令彼得知。
If you want to speak, talk to the one sitting next to you; in this way, one by one until the second and third, so they are informed.

若放恣諸根，高聲大喚坐家內者，越學法。
If you indulge your senses and shout loudly inside homes, it is a transgression of the rules.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
Those who are insane, confused, or disturbed in mind are not guilty.

是故說，小聲坐家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, you should learn to sit quietly inside homes.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, and spoke extensively as described above.

爾時六群比丘白衣家內坐，展轉調戲而共大笑，為世人所譏：
At that time, a group of six monks sat in a layperson's house, teasing each other and laughing together, and were criticized by the people:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、婬妷女人，作姿而笑坐家內？」
"How can the disciples of the monk Gautama act like princes, ministers, or lustful women, posing and laughing inside a house?"

問言：「尊者！此中有何事可笑？何故出齗，欲賣齒耶？此壞敗人，有何道法？」
They asked: "Venerables! What is so funny here? Why do you show your teeth as if to sell them? What kind of practice is this that leads to ruin?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, due to this incident, approached the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said: "Summon the group of six monks here."

佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the monks: "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered: "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「汝出家人，云何賢聖毘尼中出齗大笑？
The Buddha said: "You who have renounced worldly life, how can you laugh out loud, baring your teeth, against the rules of noble conduct?

從今日後不得家內坐笑。」
From this day forward, you shall not laugh while sitting within a household."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "All those residing within Śrāvastī should gather, so I may administer a precept with ten benefits for the monks, so that even those who have heard it will hear it again.

不得笑坐家內，應當學。」
You should learn not to laugh while sitting inside a house."

不得白衣家內笑坐，若精舍內食上，和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前坐不得笑。
Do not laugh while sitting in a layperson's house; when eating in a monastery, you may not laugh in front of the teacher, preceptor, or elder monks.

若有可笑事者，不得出齗現齒大笑，應當忍之。
If there is something laughable, you should not laugh with exposed teeth and instead should endure it.

起無常、苦、空、無我想、思惟死想，當自齧舌。
Contemplate the impermanent, suffering, emptiness, and not-self nature of things, as well as the idea of death, and bite your own tongue.

若復不止者，不得現齗大笑，當以衣角遮口制之。
If this still does not stop you, you should not laugh with exposed teeth and should cover your mouth with the corner of your robe.

若放恣諸根，白衣家內坐笑者，越學法。
If someone frivolously indulges their senses and laughs while sitting in a layperson's house, they transgress the study of Dharma.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
The insane, foolish, or those with disturbed minds are blameless.

是故說，不得笑坐家內，應當學。
Therefore it is said, you should learn not to laugh while sitting inside a house.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha stayed in Savatthi city and extensively preached as above.

爾時六群比丘覆頭坐白衣家內，為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如婬妷女人覆頭坐家內、如採蜜人？」
At that time, six groups of monks sat inside laymen's houses with their heads covered, being ridiculed by people: "How can the Shramana disciples of Shakya sit inside houses with their heads covered like promiscuous women or honey collectors?"

問言：「尊者！為患頭痛畏日炙頭耶？何故覆頭？此壞敗人，有何道法？」
They were asked: "Venerable! Are you afraid of headaches or sunburn? Why cover your head? What discipline is there for such disgraceful people?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks thus approached the Blessed One with this reason.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "Yes, indeed."

佛言：「從今日後不得覆頭坐家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, do not sit inside houses with your heads covered."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All who are residing in Savatthi city should gather, and for ten benefits, I give this discipline to the monks; even those who have heard it should hear it again."

不得覆頭坐家內，應當學。
Do not cover your head and sit inside houses, you should learn this.

覆頭者，全覆頭及兩耳，不得覆頭坐家內。
To cover the head means fully covering the head and both ears; do not cover your head and sit inside houses.

若精舍中食上、和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前，不得覆頭坐。
In the dining area, before the instructor, or in front of elder monks, do not cover your head and sit.

若風寒雨時、若病、若頭患風，不得全覆，當覆半令一耳現，若見長老比丘時當𢱍却。
In times of wind, cold, or rain, or if sick or having a headache, you should not cover completely; cover half to show one ear, and if you see an elder monk, uncover it.

若屏處、私房覆頭無罪。
If in a private place or room, there is no offense in covering the head.

若放恣諸根覆頭坐家內者，越學法。
If indulging in all senses with the head covered and sitting inside houses, it violates the discipline.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
For the insane, foolish, or mentally disturbed, there is no offense.

是故說，不得覆。
Therefore, it is said, do not cover.

頭坐家內，應當學。
Sit inside houses with your head uncovered, you should learn this.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī, expounding as above.

爾時六群比丘抄衣白衣家坐，為世人所譏：「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、婬妷女人賣色，抄衣坐家內，露現肘脇？
At that time, six groups of monks rolled up their robes and sat in laypeople’s homes, criticized by the world: "How can the Śramaṇa, sons of the Sakya, behave like princes, ministers, or licentious women selling appearances, sitting with rolled up robes in homes, exposing elbows and sides?

此壞敗人，有何道法？」
These corrupt people, where is their conduct and discipline?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, went and reported to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six groups of monks here."

佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得抄衣坐家內。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, you must not roll up your robes and sit in homes."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha instructed the monks: "All who dwell relying on the city of Śrāvastī should gather, for the sake of ten benefits I establish precepts for the monks, and even those who have heard should hear again.

不得抄衣坐家內，應當學。
You must not roll up your robes and sit in homes and should learn this.

抄衣者，一邊抄、兩邊抄，不得抄衣坐家內。
Regarding the rolling of robes, whether one side or both, you must not roll up robes and sit in homes.

若乞食、若取食時，畏污衣故得抄衣，但莫令肘現無罪。
When begging or taking food, out of fear of soiling your robes, you may roll them up, but if it doesn't expose the elbow, it is no fault.

若精舍中食上、和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前坐，不得抄衣。
When sitting before senior monks, teachers, preceptors, or elders in the monastery, you must not roll up robes.

若抄者得抄一邊，不得抄兩邊。
If you roll them, you may roll up one side but not both.

若偏袒者抄左邊，若通肩被者得抄右邊，若見長老比丘應還下。
If bare-shouldered, roll the left side; if covered across the shoulders, you may roll the right, and when you see an elder monk, you should lower them again.

若放恣諸根，反抄衣坐家內者，越學法。
If indulging the senses, rolling the robes and sitting in homes contravenes the practice.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
For the insane, foolish, or disturbed, there is no fault.

是故說，不得反抄衣坐家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, you must not roll up your robes and sit in homes, and this should be learned.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, speaking broadly as above.

爾時六群比丘抱膝坐白衣家內，為世人所譏：
At that time, six groups of monks were sitting hugging their knees inside a layperson's house, and the people criticized them:

「云何沙門釋子如王子、大臣、憍逸俗人抱膝而坐？
"Why do the monks, sons of the Shakyans, sit with their knees hugged like princes, ministers, and arrogant laypeople?

此壞敗人，有何道法？」
These ruined people, what kind of dharma do they have?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks went to report this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
Once they arrived, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今日後不得蹲坐家內。」
The Buddha said, "From this day on, you are not allowed to squat inside a house."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing in Sravasti should all gather,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
for the sake of ten benefits, I will set a precept for the monks, and those who have heard it should hear it again.

不得抱膝坐家內，應當學。」
Do not sit hugging your knees inside a house; you should learn this."



抱、衣抱，不得抱膝坐家內。
The one who clasps their knees, with hands or clothes, should not sit with knees clasped inside the house.

若精舍中食上、和上、阿闍梨、長老比丘前，不得抱膝坐。
If in front of senior monks, mentors, or elders during meals in the monastery, one should not sit with knees clasped.

若病時得衣裹，著禪帶見長老比丘時當脫。
When sick, one may cover with clothes, but should remove the meditation strap when meeting senior monks.

若屏處、私房中得抱膝坐，若見長老比丘來還正坐。
In private or secluded places, one can sit clasping knees, but should sit properly when a senior monk appears.

若放恣諸根抱膝坐家內者，越學法。
If one carelessly sits clasping knees at home, it breaks the study rule.

狂、癡、心亂無罪。
If mad, foolish, or mentally disturbed, there is no fault.

是故說，不得抱膝坐家內，應當學。
Therefore, it is said, one should learn not to sit clasping knees inside the house.



搖身并搖頭、
Shake your body and shake your head,

掉臂好覆身、
Swing your arms well to cover your body,




諦視并小聲、
Staring intently and speaking softly,

不笑覆頭坐、
Sitting with head covered, not smiling,




反抄抱膝坐。
Sit cross-legged and hug your knees.

第二跋渠竟。
The second part of the canal is finally completed.




摩訶僧祇律卷第二十一
Mahasanghika Vinaya, Volume Twenty-One




