少年易学老难成

It is easy for the young to learn but difficult for the old to accomplish.

一寸光阴不可轻

An inch of time cannot be taken lightly.

未觉池塘春草梦

Unaware, the pond dreamt of spring grasses.

阶前梧叶已秋声

But now the parasol tree leaves in front of the steps sound like autumn.




大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya




發行日期：2024-08

Release Date: August 2024

最後更新：2024-07-12

Last Updated: July 12, 2024




【编辑说明】本数据库由 财团法人佛教电子佛典基金会（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏经」所编辑   
[Editing Instructions] This database was compiled by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taishō Tripiṭaka."




蕭鎮國大德提供
Provided by Venerable Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供
Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供
Provided by a certain Venerable in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點
New punctuation provided by Master Shi Benchan




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Matters] This database can be freely circulated at no cost. For more details, please refer to the copyright declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database.




這是一個美好的早晨。
It is a beautiful morning.

今天，我們將迎接新的挑戰。
Today, we will face new challenges.

保持積極的心態並竭盡所能。
Keep a positive mindset and do your best.

相信自己，你可以實現任何目標。
Believe in yourself, you can achieve any goal.

讓我們一起創造美好的一天。
Let's create a wonderful day together.

明天將會是更好的。
Tomorrow will be even better.

祝你一切順利！
Wish you all the best!

抱有希望，迎接未來。
Embrace hope and look forward to the future.



摩訶僧祇律卷第三十二

The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume Thirty-Two

東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯

Translated by Fótuóbátuóluó and Faxian from Tianzhu during the Eastern Jin Dynasty




明雜跋渠法之十  
The tenth of the rules of mixed writing of Ming dynasty




共食法者，佛住舍衛城，
For the rule of eating together, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti,

爾時六群比丘共食，
At that time, a group of six monks were eating together,

為世人所嫌：「云何沙門釋子如世間婬泆人共食？」
which caused public disapproval: "Why do the mendicants, the sons of the Shakya, eat together like worldly, promiscuous people?"

乃至佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
Until the Buddha said, "Call those six monks to come here."

來已，佛語比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾世尊！」
They answered, "It is true, World Honored One!"

佛言：「從今日後不聽共食。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, eating together is not allowed."




一器食。  
Those who eat together, eat from the same container.

食者，五正食、五雜正食，應別器食。  
For the food, both the five primary foods and the five miscellaneous primary foods should be eaten in separate containers.

若無鉢者，應用鉤鉢、若鍵𨭨。  
If there are no bowls, one should use a hooked bowl or a container with a handle.

若復無者，應團飯著左手中，右手食。  
If there are still none, one should shape the rice into a ball and hold it in the left hand while eating with the right.

若復不能者，應置鉢著草葉上更互取食，不得俱下手。  
If that is still not possible, one should place the food on grass or leaves and take turns eating, not reaching in together.

離五正食、五雜正食，若麨、若餅、果菜，共食無罪。  
Apart from the five primary foods and five miscellaneous primary foods, eating things like flour-based food, cakes, fruits, and vegetables together is not an offense.

若共器食者，越比尼罪。  
If one eats from the same container, it is a violation comparable to the offense of stealing.

是名共食法。  
This is called the method of communal eating.




机食者，佛住舍衛城，如來以五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見難陀、優波難陀房中食机種種畫色，佛知而故問：「此是誰食机，種種畫色？」

When Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, for the benefit of five matters, every five days he would visit the monks' residence and saw various painted food trays in the room of Nanda and Upananda. The Buddha knowingly asked, "Whose food trays are these, with such various paintings?"

諸比丘答言：「是難陀、優波難陀食机。」

The monks answered, "These are the food trays of Nanda and Upananda."

佛言：「從今日後不聽机上食。」

The Buddha said, "From today onward, do not eat on the trays."




衛城，如來五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，
Furthermore, when the Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, for the benefit of five matters, he went once every five days to the rooms of monks,

見一痏手比丘，
he saw a monk with a wounded hand,

佛知而故問：「比丘調適安樂不？」
the Buddha knowingly asked, "Monk, are you comfortable and at ease?"

答言：「世尊！我痏手破鉢，世尊制戒不聽机上食，故不樂。」
He replied, "World-Honored One! My wounded hand broke the bowl, and since the World-Honored One's precept forbids eating on a stand, I am not at ease."

佛言：「從今日聽病比丘机上食，不聽種種畫色。」
The Buddha said, "From today, monks who are ill are allowed to eat on a stand, but they are not allowed various decorations."

若僧食机，種種畫色無罪。
If a communal monks' dining stand is used, having various decorations is not an offense.

若私有，聽一種色。
If it is private, only one type of decoration is allowed.

病比丘机上食，應先立心作念，得用無罪。
A sick monk should establish the intent and mindfulness first, and using a stand to eat is not an offense.

若比丘不病，一切不聽机上食。
If a monk is not ill, they are not permitted to eat on a stand in any situation.

若老病痏手、刺頭出血，若鉢重、若滿、若熱、若冷，得机上食無罪。
If one is elderly, sick, with a wounded hand, a bleeding head, or if the bowl is heavy, full, hot, or cold, they may eat on a stand without offense.

若比丘不病机上食者，得越比尼罪。
If a monk who is not ill eats on a stand, they incur an offense of minor transgression.

是名机法。
This is called the rule of eating on a stand


食蒜并覆鉢、  
Eating garlic and covering pots,

鈎紐及腰帶、  
Hooks, cords, and belts,




騎乘及同床、
Riding and sharing the same bed,

共坐同器食、
Sitting together and eating from the same vessel,




食机種種色。

Different types of food and colors.

第八跋渠竟。

The end of the eighth section.



為殺者，佛住舍衛城時。

Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti for the killing event.

難陀、優波難陀遊行還舍衛城。

Nanda and Upananda were wandering and returned to Sravasti.

時有一舊檀越名阿跋吒，是比丘時到著入聚落衣持鉢入其家，

There was an old patron named Avatja, a monk who would dress and enter the village carrying a bowl to his house.

檀越見已作是言：「阿闍梨！何故希行多時不見？」

The patron saw him and said: "Teacher! Why have you been absent for so long?"

比丘言：「長壽！我希行來，欲與我作何等好食？」

The monk replied: "Long life! I have come and hope you can make good food for me."

答言：「我明日當與阿闍梨作食。」

He replied: "Tomorrow, I will prepare food for you, Teacher."

比丘言：「汝莫作織師食。」

The monk said: "Do not make weaver's food."

便問言：「何等名織師食？」

Then he asked: "What is called weaver's food?"

比丘言：「麁飯豆羹是。」

The monk replied: "It is coarse rice and bean soup."

檀越言：「我不與阿闍梨麁飯豆羹，當與肉食。」

The patron replied: "I will not offer you coarse rice and bean soup. I will serve meat dishes."

比丘言：「汝莫與我冷肉。」

The monk said: "Do not serve me cold meat."

答言：「我不與阿闍梨冷肉食，當熱煮與。」

He replied: "I will not offer you cold meat. I will serve it hot."

比丘言：「我所言熱不謂此熱。」

The monk said: "The heat I speak of is not this kind of heat."

問言：「何等熱？」

He asked: "What kind of heat?"

比丘答言：「新死熱肉。」

The monk answered: "Freshly killed hot meat."

檀越言：「若欲爾者明日早來，當在阿闍梨前殺者可得熱。」

The patron said: "If this is what you desire, come early tomorrow, and you can witness the killing for fresh heat."

比丘答言：「可爾。」

The monk replied: "Agreed."

到明旦著衣持鉢往至其家，

At dawn, he dressed, carried his bowl, and went to the patron's house.

檀越即牽羊猪雞，羅列在比丘前殺。

The patron then led sheep, pigs, and chickens, arranging them before the monk to be slaughtered.

供食已去，檀越嫌言：

After the food offering, the patron complained:

「沙門瞿曇無數方便毀呰殺生、讚歎不殺，而此沙門目前教殺，與自殺何異？」

"The recluse Gotama has countless ways to condemn killing and praise non-killing, yet here this recluse teaches killing firsthand, how is it different from killing himself?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks then reported this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼難陀、優波難陀來。」

The Buddha said: "Summon Nanda and Upananda here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

When they arrived, the Buddha asked the monk: "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He replied: "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事。」

The Buddha said: "Monk! This is an evil deed."

乃至佛言：「汝云何現前教殺？

Until Buddha said: "How can you directly teach killing?

從今日後不聽為殺。」

Henceforth, it is not allowed to sanction killing."




比丘殺。
For those killed for a monk.

為比丘殺者，一切比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼、優婆塞、優婆夷盡不得食。
For what is killed for a monk, all monks, nuns, novice monks, novice nuns, male and female lay followers must not eat.

如是乃至為優婆夷殺，一切比丘不得食，乃至優婆夷亦不得食。
Thus, even if killed for the sake of a female lay follower, all monks must not eat, and neither should the female lay follower.

為有三事：見、聞、疑。
There are three things: seeing, hearing, doubting.

見者，現前眼見為殺，不聽食，是名見。
Seeing refers to witnessing the killing with one's own eyes, and not allowing eating. This is called seeing.

聞者，耳自聞、或從他聞為殺，不聽食。
Hearing refers to hearing about the killing with one's own ears or from others, and not allowing eating.

若前人是不可信，故欲擾亂比丘者，不應受語；當從可信人邊取定，是名聞。
If the person reporting is unreliable and seeks to disturb monks, one should not accept their words; one should confirm from a reliable person. This is called hearing.

疑者，比丘至檀越家常見羊，後往正見頭脚在地，見已心即生疑，應問：「前所見羊為在何處？」
Doubting occurs when a monk regularly sees a sheep at a donor’s house and later sees its head and feet on the ground, leading to suspicion. One should ask, "Where is the previously seen sheep?"

若言：「已為阿闍梨殺。」者，不應食。
If they say, "It has been killed for the teacher," it should not be eaten.

若言：「尊者！我為祠天故殺，食不盡。」與得食，是名疑。
If they say, "Venerable! I killed it for a heavenly offering, and it's not finished," eating is allowed. This is called doubting.

如是一切眾生，若見、若聞，疑亦如是，是名為殺。
For all beings, whether seen, heard, or doubted, it is considered as killed


人肉者，佛住舍衛城，爾時舍衛城中有優婆塞名𠲿卑，其婦亦名𠲿卑。
At that time, Buddha was residing in the city of Śravasti, where there was an Upāsaka named Upali, and his wife was also named Upali.

有客比丘來亦名𠲿卑，時優婆塞聞已便作是念：「阿闍梨與我等同字，當往請食。」
A visiting monk also named Upali came, and the householder thought, "The master's name is the same as ours, I should invite him for a meal."

即詣精舍請來家中，設種種飲食供養已，頭面禮足胡跪合掌，白言：「尊者！唯願受我四事請：衣、食、床臥具、病瘦湯藥。」
He went to the monastery to invite the monk to his home and offered various foods, then respectfully knelt and said, "Venerable! Please accept my offering of the four requisites: clothing, food, bedding, and medicine for the sick."

比丘即便受請。
The monk accepted the invitation.

時夫主欲逐商人遠行，囑婦言：「我遠行，汝在後當好供養阿闍梨，勿使有乏。」
The husband planned to go on a journey with merchants, and he instructed his wife, "I will be away, you should continue to properly provide for the master so that he lacks nothing."

去後比丘不和，欲服下藥，語優婆夷言：「我欲服下藥，能隨時次第料理食不？」
After he left, the monk was feeling unwell and wanted to take medicine, he asked the housewife, "I wish to take some medicine and need specific meals prepared at certain times, can you manage that?"

答言：「可爾。」
She agreed.

服下藥已隨次第應病與食，清粥滰粥次須肉，持罽利沙槃與婢言：「持是往買肉來。」
After taking the medicine, he followed the order and required specific meals. At one point, meat was needed, so she handed a money tray to a servant, instructing her, "Take this and go buy some meat."

其婢入市，值齋日都無殺者而不得還。
The servant went to the market, but since it was a fasting day, no animals were being slaughtered, and she couldn't buy any.

時優婆夷心生不悅言：「阿闍梨服藥，若不得隨病食者，或能增動。」
The housewife was displeased and thought, "If the master doesn't get the appropriate food with his medicine, it may worsen his condition."

即磨蕪菁子以油漬之，便入房內即以利刀割髀肉，語婢言：「汝持此肉，以蕪菁子油淨洗作食與阿闍梨，問阿闍梨明日復須何等食。」
She ground turnip seeds with oil, went into her room, cut a piece of flesh from her thigh with a sharp knife, and told the servant, "Take this meat, clean it thoroughly with the turnip seed oil, prepare it as a meal for the master, and ask him what he needs for tomorrow."

其婢如教辦食送往，問言：「明日復須何食？」
The servant did as instructed, prepared the meal, and delivered it, asking, "What food would you need for tomorrow?"

答言：「止！莫復更送。」
He replied, "Stop! Do not send any more."

時優婆夷患瘡而臥，其夫商人行還，作是念：「我常遠行還時，婦出二門、三門迎我。今何故不出？」
The housewife lay in pain from her wound, and when her merchant husband returned from his journey, he thought, "Whenever I come back from a trip, she always greets me at the second or third gate. Why not today?"

入房見婦臥床上，便瞋恚言：「汝何故慢我不出耶？」
Entering the room, he saw her lying on the bed and angrily asked, "Why are you so indifferent as not to come out?"

其婦答言：「此行有何功？夫欲使我迎。」
She replied, "What accomplishment is there in this journey for me to welcome you?"

答言：「我行得百千萬來。」
He answered, "I have brought back a great fortune."

其婦答言：「此是外財何足為奇！我自割身肉供給阿闍梨。」
She responded, "This is only external wealth, why is it special! I cut my own flesh to provide for the master."

其夫問言：「為割何處？」
Her husband asked, "Where did you cut?"

即褰衣示之，其夫見已迷悶倒地。
She lifted her garment to show him, and upon seeing it, her husband fainted and fell to the ground.

時有鬼神即語比丘。
At that moment, a spirit spoke to the monk.

時比丘聞已便入慈三昧，定力感之平復如故。
When the monk heard this, he entered a meditative state of compassion, and his concentration restored her to her original condition.

其婦語夫言：「起！起！勿怖！阿闍梨威神故，我瘡已平復。」
The wife told her husband, "Get up! Get up! Do not be afraid! Due to the master's spiritual power, my wound has healed."

其夫起已見瘡平復，即大歡喜，往到店肆上作如是言：「我家婦精進如是割身供養。」
Her husband got up, saw that the wound had healed, and was very happy. He went to the shop and said, "My wife has been so diligent as to cut her own flesh for offering."

眾人聞已嫌言：「云何沙門釋子噉人肉？」
When people heard this, they reproached, saying, "How can the Śākya sage eat human flesh?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call this monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！我不入定故。」
The monk replied, "It is true, Blessed One! I was not in meditation."

佛言：「從今日後不聽食人肉。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, eating human flesh is not permitted."



罗奈仙人鹿野苑，时有比丘黄病，医师言：「尊者服人血者可差，若不服者便死，更无余方。」
At one time, the Buddha was residing at the Deer Park in Varanasi, where there was a monk suffering from jaundice. A physician said, "Venerable, consuming human blood would cure the illness; if not consumed, death is certain, with no other remedy."

时有人犯王事，反缚两手著迦毘罗华鬘，打鼓唱令詣其刑处。
At that time, a person guilty of a crime against the king was being led to the place of execution with bound hands, adorned with a garland of kapila flowers, while drums were beaten to proclaim the sentence.

比丘至魁膾边作是言：「长寿！施我人血饮。」
The monk addressed the butcher, saying, "Long-lived one! Grant me a drink of human blood."

魁膾言：「若欲食肉亦当相与，何况血耶？」
The butcher replied, "If you desire to eat meat, I would give it to you, let alone blood?"

即坐罪人在地，以刀刺两喉脉出血，比丘两手承取血饮，为世人所嫌：「此非比丘，是噉人鬼。」
The criminal was made to sit on the ground, and his throat was cut to draw blood, which the monk caught with his hands and drank, causing people to scorn him, saying, "This is not a monk, but a demon that devours humans."

即以瓦石土块擲，是比丘劣而得脱。
Stones and clods of earth were thrown at him, yet the monk escaped in disgrace.

诸比丘以是因缘往白世尊。
The monks reported this incident to the Buddha.

佛言：「呼是比丘来。」
The Buddha said, "Call that monk here."

来已，佛问比丘：「汝实尔不？」
When he arrived, the Buddha asked, "Monk, is this true?"

答言：「实尔。世尊！」
The monk replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！此是恶事，爱命乃尔。」
The Buddha said, "Monk! This is a grievous act, done out of love for life."

佛言：「从今已后不听饮人血，乃至人髓一切不听。」
The Buddha declared, "From now on, consuming human blood, even human marrow, is not permitted."

若比丘头生疮，医言：「须人骨灰涂得差。」者，得涂。
If a monk has a sore on his head and a physician recommends: "It needs human bone ash for healing," it is permitted to apply it.

涂已不得众中住，应在边小房中住，差已应净洗浴还入众中。
After applying, the monk cannot stay among the community; he should reside in a small dwelling at the periphery. Once healed, he should clean himself thoroughly before returning to the community.



舍離，時有一種姓食龍肉，諸比丘亦有食龍肉者，是故殺者眾多。  
Again, the Buddha was residing in Vesali, and there was a clan that ate dragon meat, and some monks also ate dragon meat, resulting in many deaths.

時有一龍女到世尊床前立住而啼，佛知而故問：「汝何故啼耶？」  
At that time, a dragon girl came to stand in front of the World Honored One's bed and cried, and the Buddha knowingly asked, "Why are you crying?"

時龍女白佛言：「世尊！毘舍離人食龍，諸比丘亦食，以是故殺者眾多。唯願世尊勿令諸比丘食龍。」  
The dragon girl said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! The people of Vesali eat dragons, and the monks do too, resulting in many deaths. I only wish that the World Honored One would not allow the monks to eat dragons."

爾時世尊為龍女隨順說法，示教利喜而去。  
Then the World Honored One compassionately taught the Dharma to the dragon girl, guiding her towards joy and leaving thereafter.

時世尊往到眾多比丘所，敷尼師檀而坐，即為比丘具說上事：「從今日後不聽食龍肉、龍血、龍骨、龍筋、龍髓，一切不聽食。若身外有諸病，須骨灰塗者，得用無罪。」  
The World Honored One went to the assembly of many monks, spread a mat and sat, then informed the monks of the matter: "From today onwards, consuming dragon meat, dragon blood, dragon bones, dragon tendons, and dragon marrow is not permitted. If there are external ailments that require the application of bone ash, it may be used without sin."




佛住王舍城，時瓶沙王象死，有諸小姓旃陀羅食肉，諸比丘亦有食者。
The Buddha was residing in Rajagaha at the time when King Bimbisara's elephant died, and some lower caste Chandala ate its meat, and some of the monks also ate it.

時耆舊童子至佛所，頭面禮足却住一面白佛言：「世尊！瓶沙王象死，有諸小姓旃陀羅噉肉，諸比丘亦有噉者。
At that time, an elderly boy came to the Buddha, bowed his head and respectfully stood to one side and said: "World-Honored One! King Bimbisara's elephant has died, and some lower caste Chandala have eaten its meat, and some of the monks have eaten it too.

比丘者，出家人，人所敬重，唯願世尊莫令食象肉。」
Monks are renunciants who are respected by people, and I hope that the World-Honored One will not allow them to eat elephant meat."

世尊為童子隨順說法示教利喜，頭面禮足而退。
The World-Honored One, in accordance with the boy's wish, preached the Dharma, guiding and benefiting with joy, and then the boy respectfully departed.

時世尊往至眾多比丘所，敷尼師檀坐，為諸比丘具說上事，佛言：「從今已後不聽食象肉，乃至象髓亦不聽食。
At that time, the World-Honored One went to the gathering of many monks, spread the mat, sat down, and recounted the incident to them, saying: "From now on, eating elephant meat is not permitted, and even elephant marrow is not permitted.

聽以象牙、骨作鉢支衣細結無罪。」
Using elephant ivory and bones to make utensils or fine clothing is permitted and is not a sin."



佛住王舍城，

The Buddha was residing in the city of Rajagriha,

時瓶沙王馬死，

at that time King Bimbisara's horse died,

亦如上象中說。

as mentioned above with the elephants.

若外有癬疥病，

If there is a case of eczema or scabies,

須馬血塗者無罪。

needing horse blood as a remedy is not a sin.

塗已不得眾中住，

After applying it, one should not stay among the crowd,

應在邊小房中住。

and should instead stay in a small room on the side.




佛住舍衛城

The Buddha was staying in the city of Śrāvastī.

時諸比丘食狗肉，入聚落時為狗所逐競吠。

At that time, some monks ate dog meat and were chased and barked at by dogs when they entered a village.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，

The monks, due to this incident, went to the Blessed One,

乃至佛言：「從今日後不聽食狗肉，

and said to the Buddha: "From today onward, it is not allowed to eat dog meat,

乃至狗髓不聽食。

including the marrow of dogs."

若為狗所齧，須燒狗毛塗瘡者得用無罪。」

If bitten by a dog, one is allowed to use burnt dog hair to treat the wound without incurring any offense."



佛住舍衛城，時有比丘食烏肉，
While the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, a monk ate crow meat,

比丘入聚落乞食，或林中經行時，群烏逐鳴。
When the monk entered the village for alms or walked in the forest, flocks of crows followed and cawed.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
The monks, due to this cause, went to inform the World-Honored One,

乃至佛言：「從今日後不聽食烏肉，
and eventually the Buddha said, "From today onwards, eating crow meat is not permitted,

乃至烏髓亦不聽食，
and even crow marrow is not allowed,

若須翅翮外用者無罪。」
But there is no fault if only the feathers are required for external use."



佛住舍衛城，
The Buddha resided in Sravasti,

時有比丘食鷲鳥肉，
At that time, there was a monk who ate vulture meat,

比丘近林中經行，
The monk was walking by a forest,

有諸群鷲逐比丘鳴喚。
and a group of vultures chased after him, calling out.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
The monks, due to this occurrence, went to report to the Blessed One,

乃至佛言：
and the Buddha said:

「從今已後不聽食鷲鳥肉，
"From now on, it is not allowed to eat vulture meat,

乃至鷲髓亦不聽食，
and even vulture marrow is not allowed to be eaten,

若須翅翮外用者無罪。」
if needed for external use with wings and feathers, it is not an offense."



一、人肉。
1. Human meat.

二、龍肉。
2. Dragon meat.

三、象肉。
3. Elephant meat.

四、馬肉。
4. Horse meat.

五、狗肉。
5. Dog meat.

六、烏肉。
6. Crow meat.

七、鷲鳥肉。
7. Vulture meat.

八、猪肉。
8. Pork.

九、獼猴肉。
9. Monkey meat.

十、師子肉。
10. Lion meat.




蒜者，生熟皮葉，一切盡不聽食。
Garlic, whether raw or cooked, including its skin and leaves, is completely prohibited from being consumed. 

若須外用塗瘡聽用。
If it is needed for external use to apply on sores, it is permitted.

若塗已，不得眾中住，當在邊小房中住，差已應淨洗浴還聽入眾。
After applying it, one should not dwell among the community; instead, one should stay in a small separate room, and once healed, one must cleanse and bathe before rejoining the community.

是名肉蒜法。
This is known as the rule regarding garlic.



住舍衛城，時難陀、優波難陀至牧牛家坐床上，

During the time when the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, Nanda and Upananda went to the cowherd's house and sat on the bed.

有新生犢子見比丘衣色似母，跳踉來趣。

A newborn calf saw the monk's robe resembling its mother and jumped toward it.

比丘即以手摩額上，細滑觸手，便作是言：「此皮軟好，可作坐具。」

The monk then stroked its forehead, feeling its smooth touch, and said, "This skin is soft and nice; it can be used as a seat cushion."

時牧牛人便作是念：「此比丘是王大臣貴勝所識，有大力勢，故當欲得是皮。」

At that moment, the cowherd thought, "This monk is known by the king and noble ministers, he has great power, so he must want this skin."

即問：「阿闍梨欲須皮耶？我當與。」

He then asked, "Master, do you need this skin? I will give it to you."

比丘便言：「正與我此犢皮。」

The monk replied, "Just give me the calf's skin."

牧牛人言：「我家中有成死犢皮亦軟好，當鞣治相與。」

The cowherd said, "I have a dead calf's skin at home, which is also soft and good. I will treat it and give it to you."

比丘言：「審與我者，正與我是，更不須餘者。」

The monk said, "If you're giving it to me, give me this one. I don't need another."

時牧牛人便作是念：「此比丘有大勢力，能作不饒益事。」

At that moment, the cowherd thought, "This monk is powerful and can cause harm."

畏難故即比丘前殺犢，剝皮與之。

Fearing difficulty, he killed the calf in front of the monk, skinned it, and gave it to him.

時犢母牧還，不見其子，循籬鳴喚。

When the calf's mother returned, not seeing her child, she called out along the fence.

牧牛人嫌言：「沙門釋子而無慈心，使沙門在犢母處者意當云何？」

The cowherd complained, "The Shramana Sakya has no compassion. How could the shramana act like this in front of the calf's mother?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks reported this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼難陀、優波難陀來。」

The Buddha said, "Call Nanda and Upananda here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

After they came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

They replied, "Yes, it is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事，汝云何現前教殺？從今已後不聽用皮。」

The Buddha said, "Monks! This is an evil act. How could you teach killing right in front of you? From now on, using skins will not be allowed."



皮者，牛皮、水牛皮、虎皮、豹皮、羆皮、鹿皮，如是一切皮不聽坐，

These are cowhide, buffalo hide, tiger hide, leopard hide, bear hide, and deer hide; sitting on any such hides is not allowed.

唯聽恕奴邊地羊皮。

Only lambskin from Shunubeidi is permitted.

羊皮有二種：一者羖羊，二者羺羊。

There are two types of lambskin: one is ram, the other is ewe.

羖羊、羺羊各有十種，如上說。

Each ram and ewe has ten types, as mentioned above.

若坐皮上，越比尼罪。

If you sit on hides, it is a Pārājika offense.

若坐皮兜羅褥上者，二越比尼罪。

If you sit on a bilayer rug, it is two Pārājika offenses.

若坐革屣上，越比尼罪。

If you sit on a leather shoe, it is a Pārājika offense.

若臥革屣上齊膝以上，越比尼罪；膝已下無罪。

If you lie on a leather shoe above the knee, it is a Pārājika offense; below the knee, there is no offense.

若皮織床，坐上無罪。

If a bed is woven with hides, sitting on it is not an offense.



揩脚物者，佛住舍衛城，時難陀、優波難陀，作種種揩脚物洗足，
The one using foot-washing materials was in the city of Shravasti, with Nanda and Upananda making various foot-washing materials to clean their feet,

外道弟子見已便作是念：「我等當共試擾亂優婆塞去。」
The followers of the outside path saw this and thought, "Let us try to disturb the lay followers."

如上屑末中廣說，
It is extensively explained above in the fragments,

乃至佛言：「從今日後不聽用種種物揩洗脚。」
Until the Buddha said, "From today onward, the use of various materials for foot-washing is not allowed."




揩物者，若方、若圓刻上如摩沙豆、蒙具豆形，一切不聽用。
For cleaning objects, if they are square or round and inscribed like polishing beans or helmet bean shapes, all are not allowed to be used.

脚底有垢破，得圓草、若塼瓦聽用。
If the soles of the feet are dirty or broken, circular grass or tiles are allowed to be used.

是名揩脚物。
These are called foot cleaning items.




住王舍城，

As for the eye ointment, the Buddha was residing in the city of Rajgir,

時世人節日男女出城遊觀，

At that time, during a festival, men and women of the town were going out to wander and observe,

時六群比丘以空青黑物莊眼，

At that moment, a group of six monks were decorating their eyes with antimony and black materials,

為世人所嫌：「云何沙門釋子如貴勝童子以空青莊眼？」

Causing the people to dislike them, saying: "Why do disciples of the Shakyamuni, like noble children, decorate their eyes with antimony?"

有見黑物莊者，復言：「沙門釋子如下賤使人，黑物莊眼而行。

Some who saw the monks using black decorations further said: "The disciples of the Shakyamuni behave like lowly servants, walking with eyes decorated black.

此壞敗人，何道之有？」

These people are corrupt and ruined, what doctrine do they have?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，

The monks, due to this incident, went to report to the Bhagavan (World Honored One),

乃至佛言：「從今日後不聽莊眼。」

And the Buddha said: "From this day forward, decorating the eyes is not permitted."




復次佛住舍衛城耆舊童子菴婆羅園，

Next, the Buddha stayed at Anāthapindika's park in Jetavana near Sravasti.

時諸比丘眼痛，耆舊童子言：「尊者！可以此藥塗眼。」

At that time, some monks had eye pain, and Anāthapindika said, "Venerable ones! You can use this medicine for the eyes."

諸比丘言：「世尊制戒不聽塗眼。」

The monks said, "The Buddha has set precepts that do not allow the application of eye ointment."

童子言：「我當往從世尊乞此願。」

Anāthapindika said, "I will go and request this permission from the Buddha."

即往佛所頭面禮足，却住一面白佛言：

Then he went to the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and said:

「世尊！諸比丘是一食人，眼是人之所重，

"Lord! The monks have only one meal a day, and the eyes are very important to people,

唯願世尊聽諸比丘著眼藥。」

I sincerely wish the Lord would allow the monks to apply the eye medicine."

佛言：「從今已後聽用眼藥，除空青。

The Buddha said, "From now on, the use of eye medicine is permitted, except for orpiment.

若醫言：『尊者！此眼痛，得空青屑塗便差，更無餘方。』

If a doctor says, 'Venerable one! For this eye pain, applying orpiment powder will cure it, and there is no other remedy.'

若爾者得塗。塗已不得眾中住，應在邊小房中，

Then it is allowed to apply it. After applying, they should not stay among the assembly; they should stay in a small room on the side,

差已當淨洗得還入眾。」

and after recovery, they should clean themselves properly before returning to the assembly."

是名眼藥。

This is called eye medicine.




眼藥筒者，佛住舍衛城，時諸比丘持樹葉盛眼藥。
Regarding the eye-medicine case, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, some monks were carrying eye-medicine using tree leaves.

佛知而故問：「比丘此是何等？」
The Buddha knowingly asked, "Monks, what is this?"

答言：「是眼藥。」
They replied, "This is eye medicine."

佛言：「眼藥是貴物，應用筒盛。」
The Buddha said, "Eye medicine is a precious substance, it should be stored in a container."

時諸比丘作金銀筒盛，佛言：「金銀及一切寶不聽用。」
At that time, the monks made containers of gold and silver, and the Buddha said, "Gold, silver, and all treasures should not be used."

應用銅、鐵、白鑞、竹葦筐、鳥翮，下至皮裹。
Instead, use copper, iron, white tin, bamboo and reed baskets, bird feathers, or down to leather wrapping.

是名藥筒。
This is called a medicine case.




佛住舍衛城，時有比丘持竹作眼藥籌，

The eye medicine applicator — Buddha was residing in Shravasti city, at that time there was a monk using bamboo to make an eye medicine applicator,

佛知而故問：「比丘此是何等？」

The Buddha, knowing this, deliberately asked, "Monk, what is this?"

答言：「世尊！是眼藥籌。」

He replied, "World-Honored One! It is an eye medicine applicator."

佛言：「眼是軟物，應用滑物作籌。」

The Buddha said, "The eyes are soft, something smooth should be used to make an applicator."

時有比丘便以金銀作，

At that time, a monk made one with gold and silver,

佛言：「不聽金銀及一切寶物作，應用銅鐵、牙骨、栴檀堅木作，

The Buddha said, "Do not use gold, silver, or any precious materials; make it with bronze, iron, ivory, bone, sandalwood or durable wood,

揩摩令滑澤，下至用指頭。」

Polish it to make it smooth, or even use a fingertip."

是名眼藥籌法。

This is called the method for making an eye medicine applicator.




蓋法者，佛住王舍城，
At that time, Buddha was residing in Rajagaha.

時世人節會日男女遊觀，
On festival days, men and women were out watching and enjoying.

時六群比丘持種種雜色傘蓋、
At that time, a group of six monks held multi-colored umbrellas,

有持樹皮傘蓋者，
Some held umbrellas made of tree bark,

為世人所嫌：
This was deemed inappropriate by the people:

「云何沙門釋子如王子大臣，
"How can these monks, followers of the Sakya, like princes and ministers,

持種種雜色傘蓋？」
carry multi-colored umbrellas?"

見持樹葉者，復作是言：
Seeing those with leaves, they further said:

「云何沙門釋子如下賤使人，
"How can these monks, followers of the Sakya, be like lowly servants,

持樹葉傘蓋行。
carrying umbrellas made of leaves?

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
These people are so degraded, how can they follow the path?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
Because of this, the monks went to report to the Blessed One,

乃至佛言：
and Buddha said:

「從今已後不聽持傘蓋。」
"From now on, carrying umbrellas is not allowed."



復次佛住舍衛城，

Again, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī,

時長老阿那律金毘羅，

At that time, the elder Ānanda and Kāśyapa,

在塔山安居竟，還舍衛城禮拜世尊。

having completed their rains retreat on Vulture Peak, returned to Śrāvastī and paid homage to the Blessed One.

佛知而故問：「比丘！衣何故醎污乃爾？」

The Buddha, knowing the situation, deliberately asked, "Bhikkhu! Why are your robes so dirty and stained?"

比丘答言：「世尊制戒不聽持傘蓋，我乞食被雨，是故如是。」

The monk answered, "The Blessed One laid down a rule prohibiting the use of umbrellas, so I was drenched by the rain while begging for alms, hence they are like this."

佛言：「從今日後聽持傘蓋。」

The Buddha said, "From this day onward, monks are allowed to carry umbrellas."



傘蓋者，樹皮蓋、樹葉蓋、竹蓋，如是等蓋聽用，不聽種種雜色傘蓋。

Umbrellas made of bark, leaves, or bamboo are permitted, but umbrellas of various mixed colors are not allowed.

是名傘蓋法也。

This is called the rule of umbrellas.




扇法者，世人節會日男女遊觀，六群比丘持雲母莊挍扇、有持草扇者，為世人所嫌：

The fan law states that on festival days, people go out for sightseeing, and some monks carry decorative mica fans, while others carry grass fans, which are disliked by people.

「云何沙門釋子如王子大臣，持雲母莊挍扇？」

"How can the Shramana disciples be like princes or ministers, carrying decorative mica fans?"

見有持草扇者，復言：「云何沙門釋子如下賤人持草扇行？此壞敗人，何道之有？」

When they see someone holding a grass fan, they further say, "How can the Shramana disciples be like lowly people carrying grass fans? Such degradation, what path do they follow?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，乃至佛言：「從今已後不聽持扇。」

The monks went to the Blessed One with this reason, until Buddha said, "From now on, do not carry fans."

復次佛住毘舍離，諸比丘在禪坊中患蚊子，以衣扇作聲。

Again, while Buddha was residing in Vaisali, the monks were troubled by mosquitoes in the meditation hall, and they made noise by fanning with their robes.

佛知而故問：「比丘作何等，如象振耳作聲？」

The Buddha knowingly asked, "What are the monks doing, making sounds like elephants flapping their ears?"

比丘答言：「世尊制戒不得捉扇，諸比丘患蚊，以衣拂故作聲。」

The monks replied, "The Blessed One prohibited carrying fans, and the monks are troubled by mosquitoes, so they make noise by waving their robes."

佛言：「從今已後聽捉竹扇、葦扇、樹葉扇，除雲母扇及種種畫色扇。」

The Buddha said, "From now on, you are allowed to carry bamboo fans, reed fans, and leaf fans, except for mica fans and various colored decorative fans."

若僧扇作種種色無罪，若私扇壞色，若有持種種香塗扇來施者，聽洗已受用。

If a communal fan is colored, it is not an offense. If a personal fan is faded, and if someone offers a fan with various fragrances, it may be washed and used.

是名扇法。

This is called the fan law.




拂法者，佛住王舍城，世人節會日男女遊觀，時六群比丘持白𤛆牛尾拂，以金銀作柄、有持馬尾拂者，為世人所嫌，乃至佛言：「從今已後不聽捉拂。」
Regarding the rule on fly whisks, when the Buddha was residing in Rajagriha, on festival days, men and women would go out for recreation. During that time, a group of six monks carried white ox-tail fly whisks with handles made of gold and silver, and some carried horse-tail fly whisks, which were disliked by people. Consequently, the Buddha said, "From now on, carrying fly whisks is not allowed."




復次佛住毘舍離，諸比丘禪坊中患蚊故，以樹葉拂蚊作聲。
Furthermore, when the Buddha was residing in Vaishali, the monks in the meditation hall were troubled by mosquitoes, so they made a sound by swatting them with leaves.

佛知而故問：「比丘此何等聲？」
The Buddha, knowing this, intentionally asked, "Monks, what is this sound?"

答言：「世尊制戒不聽捉拂，是故諸比丘以樹葉拂蚊作聲。」
They replied, "The Blessed One has prescribed a rule prohibiting the handling of swatters, so the monks are making a sound by swatting mosquitoes with leaves."

佛言：「從今已後聽捉拂。」
The Buddha said, "From now on, you are allowed to handle swatters."




拂者，線拂、裂㲲拂、芒草拂、樹皮拂，是中除白𤛆牛尾、白馬尾、金銀柄，餘一切聽捉。
A duster made from thread, split cloth, pampas grass, or bark—aside from white ox tails, white horse tails, or those with gold or silver handles—can be used freely.

若有白者當染壞色已聽用。
If there are white ones, they should be dyed a dull color before use is permitted.

捉拂時不得如婬女捉拂作姿作相，是名拂法。
When holding a duster, one should not mimic the gestures of a wanton woman; this is known as the etiquette of using a duster.




為殺食人肉、
In order to kill those who eat human flesh,

眼藥并筒籌、
Eye medicine and tube straws,



牛皮揩脚物、

A leather foot-wiping tool,

傘蓋及扇拂。

umbrella covers and fan dusters.




第九跋渠竟。  
End of the ninth section.  




住舍衛城，時有比丘痔病語醫言：

The knife practitioner, Buddha was living in the Shravasti city, and at that time a monk with hemorrhoids said to a doctor:

「長壽！能為我刀治不？」

"Long life! Can you treat me with a knife?"

答言：「爾。」

He replied, "Yes."

醫便作是念：

The doctor thought:

「是諸沙門聰明智慧，見我治者便當學得，不復求我。」

"These monks are intelligent and wise, if they see me treating, they will learn and not seek me again."

即遣諸比丘去已，欲作非法。

Then he sent the monks away, intending to do something improper.

時此比丘即生疑，喚諸比丘言：

At that time, this monk became suspicious and called the monks, saying:

「長老來此，醫欲作非法。」

"Elders, come here, the doctor wants to do something improper."

諸比丘聞即便來入，醫怖畏棄刀而走。

Hearing this, the monks came immediately, and the doctor, frightened, threw away the knife and fled.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, due to this reason, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼彼比丘來。」

The Buddha said, "Call that monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

When he came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He replied, "Yes, World-Honored One!"

佛言：「比丘！汝云何用刀治愛處。

The Buddha said, "Monk! How can you use a knife to treat a beloved place?

從今已後不聽用刀治愛處。」

From now on, it is not allowed to use a knife to treat a beloved place.


愛處者，離穀道邊各四指。
For the tender area, it is four fingers away from the grain path.

若有癰痤癤，聽嚼小麥、雞屎塗上使熟，當令同和上、阿闍梨擿破。
If there are abscesses or boils, permission is given to chew wheat and apply with chicken manure to ripen, and then allow the abbot or master to break it open.

若餘處有癰痤癤等諸病，須刀治者聽用。
If there are abscesses or other ailments elsewhere that require a knife for treatment, permission is granted to use it.

用刀治愛處者，偷蘭罪。
Using a knife to treat the tender area constitutes the crime of theft.

是名刀治。
This is called knife treatment.




灌筒者，佛住舍衛城，有比丘𤴲痟病，語醫言：「長壽！能為我灌病不？」

The one with an irrigation tube, the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, where there was a monk suffering from illness, said to the doctor, "Long life! Can you treat my illness with irrigation?"

答言：「可爾。」

The doctor replied, "Yes."

即作是念：「此諸沙門聰明智慧，見我灌者更不喚我。」乃至棄筒而走。

Then he thought, "These śramaṇas are intelligent and wise; once they see me using the tube, they won't call me again." So he threw away the tube and left.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，

The monks, because of this incident, went to inform the World-honored One.

乃至佛言：「汝云何用筒灌病？從今已後不聽用筒。」

The Buddha then said, "Why do you use a tube for treatment? From now on, do not use tubes."




筒者，牛皮筒、水牛皮筒、羊皮筒，如是一切不聽用灌。
A tube means a cowhide tube, a buffalo hide tube, or a sheepskin tube; all of these are not permitted for use in oiling.

若醫言：「此病須油灌。」
If a doctor says: "This ailment requires oil application."

者，應在浴室中穿板盛油，褰衣坐上、口含甘蔗。
Then, you should puncture a board in the bathroom to hold the oil, sit upon it with clothing lifted, and hold sugarcane in your mouth.

若復以㲲衣絮等內著油中，臨孔上按之，令油流入者無罪。
If again someone uses linen or cotton wadding soaked in oil and presses it over the hole to let the oil flow in, there is no offense.

若筒灌者，偷蘭罪。
If one applies oil using a tube, it constitutes the offense of Stealing Dhamma.

是名筒灌法。
This is called the method of oiling with a tube.



剃髮法者，佛住舍衛城，南方國土有邑名大林，時有商人驅八牛到北方俱哆國。
The rules for shaving the head: The Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, and in the southern country, there was a town named Dalin. At that time, a merchant drove eight oxen to the northern country of Kudra. 

復有一商人，共在澤中放牛。
Another merchant was also there, herding cattle in a marsh.

時離車捕龍食之。
At that time, a scoundrel caught a dragon to eat it.

捕得一龍女，龍女受布薩法無害心，能使人穿鼻牽行。
He captured a dragon girl, but the dragon girl had embraced the precepts of non-harming, and could be led by having her nose pierced.

商人見之形相端正，即起慈心，問離車言：「汝牽此欲作何等？」
The merchant saw her dignified appearance, felt compassion, and asked the scoundrel, "What do you intend to do with her?"

答言：「我欲殺噉。」商人言：「勿殺！我與汝一牛貿取，放之令去。」
He responded, "I want to kill and eat her." The merchant replied, "Do not kill her! I will trade you one ox for her release."

捕者不肯，乃至八牛方言：「此肉多美，今為汝故我當放之。」
The captor was unwilling, but upon offering eight oxen, he said, "This meat is exquisite, but I will release her for you."

即取八牛，放龍女去。
He accepted the eight oxen and released the dragon girl.

時商人尋復念言：「此是惡人，恐復追逐更還捕取。」
The merchant thought, "This is an evil man, and I fear he may chase and capture her again."

即自隨逐看其向到池邊，龍變為人語商人言：「天施我命，我欲報恩，可共入宮，當報天恩。」
So he followed to see where she was heading. At the pond's edge, the dragon transformed into a human and said to the merchant, "Heaven has granted me life, and I wish to repay the kindness. Please accompany me to the palace to express my gratitude to heaven."

商人答言：「不能，汝等龍性卒暴瞋恚無常，或能殺我。」
The merchant replied, "I cannot, for you dragons are known to be suddenly wrathful and fickle, and may kill me."

答言：「不爾。前人繫我，我力能殺彼，但以受布薩法故都無殺心。」
She explained, "Not so. When the previous person tied me up, I had the power to kill him, but because I have taken the precepts, I have no intent to harm."

何況天今施我壽命，而當加害？
"How could I harm you when heaven has just granted me life?"

若不去者小住此中，我今先入拼擋宮中。」
"If you choose not to go, stay here briefly. I will first enter and make arrangements within the palace."

即便入去。
She then went in.

是龍門邊見二龍繫在一處，見已商人問言：「汝為何事被繫？」
At the dragon's gate, two dragons were tied in one place, and the merchant asked, "Why are you bound?"

答言：「此龍女半月中三日受齋法，我弟兄守護此龍女不堅固，為離車所捕得，以是故被繫，唯願天慈語令放我。」
They replied, "The dragon girl observes the precepts thrice in a fortnight, and we brothers failed to protect her firmly, leading to her capture by the wicked man, thus we are bound here. We wish for heavenly compassion to set us free."

此龍女若問：『欲食何等食？
When this dragon girl asks, 'What kind of food would you like to eat?'

』者，龍宮中有食，盡壽乃能消者，有二十年消者、有七年消者、有閻浮提食，若索者當索閻浮提人間食。」
In the dragon's palace, there is food that takes a lifetime to digest, or 20 years, or 7 years, or there is Jambudvipa human food. One should ask for Jambudvipa food."

龍女拼擋已，即便呼入坐寶床褥上，龍女白言：「天今欲食何等食？
After making arrangements, the dragon girl then called him in and seated him on the precious bedding, asking, "What kind of food do you wish to eat?"

為欲食一食盡壽？」乃至答言：「欲食閻浮提人間食。」
Do you wish to eat a meal that lasts your entire life?" He replied, "I wish to eat Jambudvipa human food."

即持種種飲食與。
She then presented an array of foods to him.

問龍女言：「此何故被繫？」
He asked the dragon girl, "Why are they bound?"

龍女言：「天但食，用問為？”
The dragon girl said, "Just eat, why ask?"

「不爾！我要欲知之。」
"No, I want to know."

為問不已，即語言：「此人有過，我欲殺之。」
As he kept inquiring, she said, "These individuals have wronged me, and I want to kill them."

商人言：「汝莫殺。」
The merchant pleaded, "Do not kill."

「不爾！要當殺之。」
She insisted, "No, they must be killed."

商人言：「汝放彼者，我當食耳。」
The merchant offered, "Release them, and I will eat here."

白言：「不得直爾放之，當罰六月擯置人間。」
She said, "They cannot be released directly; they should be banished to the human realm for six months as punishment."

即罰六月人間。
So they were sentenced to six months among humans.

商人見龍宮中種種寶物莊嚴宮殿，商人問言：「汝有如是莊嚴，用受布薩為？」
The merchant saw the various treasures that adorned the dragon palace and asked, "Why do you observe the precepts with such grandeur?"

答言：「我龍法有五事苦。
She answered, "In my life as a dragon, I endure five kinds of suffering.

何等五？生時龍、眠時龍、婬時龍、瞋時龍、死時龍。
What are the five? Birth as a dragon, sleep as a dragon, lust as a dragon, anger as a dragon, and death as a dragon.

一日之中三過皮肉落地熱沙爆身。」
In one day, I shed my skin and flesh three times, my body burns on hot sand."

復問：「汝欲求何等？」
He asked again, "What do you seek?"

答言：「我欲求人道中生。所以者何？畜生道中苦，不知法故。」
She replied, "I wish to be reborn in the human realm. Why? Because in the realm of beasts, we suffer and know not the Dharma."

「我已得人身，應求何等？」
"I have gained a human body. What should I seek?"

龍女言：「出家難得。」
The dragon girl said, "It is hard to seek ordination."

又問：「當就誰出家？」
He asked again, "To whom should I go for ordination?"

答言：「如來、應供、正遍知今在舍衛城，未度者度、未脫者脫，汝可就出家。」
She replied, "The Tathagata, worthy of offerings, perfectly enlightened one, is now in Sravasti. He will guide those not yet guided and liberate those not yet freed. You should go to be ordained."

便言：「我欲還歸。」
He then said, "I want to return."

龍女即與八鉼金，語言：「此是龍金，足汝父母眷屬終身用不盡。」
The dragon girl gave him eight pieces of gold, saying, "This is dragon gold; it will suffice for your parents and family for a lifetime."

語言：「汝合眼。」
She said, "Close your eyes."

即以神變持著本國。
And with her divine power, she transported him back to his own country.

行伴先至語其家言：「入龍宮去。」
His traveling companion had already arrived and told his family, "He went to the dragon palace."

父母謂兒已死，眷屬宗親聚在一處悲啼哭。
His parents believed their son had died, and relatives and clansmen were gathered, mourning and crying together.

時放牧者及取薪草人見已，先還語其家言：「某甲來歸。」
Upon seeing this, the herder and firewood gatherer spoke up and told the family, "So-and-so has returned home."

家人聞已即大歡喜出迎入家，入家已為作生會。
Upon hearing this, the family was overjoyed and came out to welcome him home, celebrating his return with a feast.

作會時以八鉼金持與父母：「此是龍金，截已更生，盡壽用之不可盡也。唯願父母聽我出家。」
During the feast, he gave the eight pieces of gold to his parents, saying, "This is dragon gold, which regenerates when cut, and it is inexhaustible throughout life. I only ask my parents to allow me to ordain."

其父母不放，即便走詣祇洹精舍，比丘即度出家。
His parents did not permit him, so he ran to the Jetavana monastery, where the monks ordained him.

父母尋後來至精舍門，問諸比丘：「汝識某甲不？」
Later, his parents came to the monastery gate and asked the monks, "Do you recognize so-and-so?"

皆言：「不見不聞。」
They all said, "We have neither seen nor heard of him."

有比丘語言：「汝但此門間住，若有者須臾自當出入。」
A monk told them, "Just wait here at the gate, and if he is here, he will come and go shortly."

即如其言須臾待之，便見兒出，作是嫌言：「沙門釋子妄語，見言不見、聞言不聞。」
After waiting briefly as advised, they saw their son come out, and said critically, "The monks falsely claimed not to have seen or heard of him."

兒語父母：「莫作不饒益事，我此間出家誰都得知。」
The son said to his parents, "Do not engage in unhelpful behavior. My ordination here is something everyone will eventually know."

即往至佛所頭面禮足却坐一面，佛為說法示教利喜，得法眼淨已，即語兒言：「我等便是更生，汝今出家大得善利。」
He then went to the Buddha, paid homage, and sat to one side. The Buddha preached the Dharma, instructing and delighting him. With the Dharma eye of purity thus obtained, the Buddha said to the son, "We are both reborn; your ordination brings great benefit."

諸比丘聞向嫌言，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks heard this critical remark and, with this reason, went to inform the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼彼比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call that monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When he arrived, the Buddha asked, "Is it true what you did?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛語比丘：「汝云何不白眾度人出家，從今日後不聽不白僧度人出家，應白剃髮出家。」
The Buddha told the monk, "Why did you ordain someone without informing the assembly? From now on, ordaining without informing the Sangha is not permitted. One should announce for a shaving and ordination first."



白者，白一切眾僧，下至白上座八人，應語令使如法白剃髮，不白出家得越比尼罪；

To declare is to inform all the monks, at least down to the senior monks numbering eight, instructing them to perform the ritual shaving of the head formally; failure to declare when taking vows results in a transgression of monastic law.

若俱白出家俱無罪。

If both declare when taking vows, neither will have sinned.

若都不白出家、不白剃髮，二越比尼罪；

If both do not declare when taking vows or shaving, it results in two transgressions of monastic law.

二俱白者無罪。

However, if both declare, there is no sin.

若出界度者無罪。

If one crosses the boundary, there is no sin.

是名剃髮。

This is called the ritual shaving of the head.



復次佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園，如來處處度人，比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷、國王、長者、外道、沙門、婆羅門。

Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the Karanda Bamboo Grove in Rajagriha, guiding people everywhere, including monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, kings, elders, non-Buddhists, ascetics, and Brahmins.

佛告比丘：「汝等從今已後亦當度人出家受具足。」

The Buddha told the monks, "You should also guide people to renounce worldly life and receive ordination from now on."

爾時諸比丘亦學如來善來，度人出家鬚髮故在。

At that time, the monks also learned from the Tathagata's benevolence and guided people to renounce their worldly life, leaving their hair and beard intact.

佛語諸比丘：「何處一切得如來無畏口鬚髮自落？從今已後應剃髮。」

The Buddha said to the monks, "From where does the Tathagata's fearless mouth cause one's hair and beard to fall off? From now on, you should shave your hair."

剃髮時諸比丘剃髮不剃鬚，有比丘剃鬚不剃髮。

When shaving, some monks shaved their hair but not their beard, while some shaved their beard but not their hair.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

Due to this, the monks went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「應一切剃。」

The Buddha said, "You should shave everything."



剃者應先剃鬚後剃髮。
The shaver should first shave the beard then shave the hair.

若剃髮人難共語者，前剃髮無罪。
If the person being shaved is difficult to communicate with, shaving the hair first is not a fault.

若欲新出家者，不得便說出家樂，應說出家苦：「一食、一住、一眠、少食、少飲、多覺、少眠，長壽能不？」
If someone wishes to become a monk, they should not immediately talk about the joys of monastic life, but should speak of its hardships: "One meal, one dwelling, one resting, eating less, drinking less, being more aware, sleeping less, can you endure this for a long life?"

若言：「能。」應與剃。
If they say, "Yes, I can." then they should be shaved.

比丘先剃髮後剃鬚無罪。
A monk shaving the hair first and then the beard is not at fault.

是名剃髮。
This is called shaving the hair.



剃髮具者，佛住俱薩羅國遊行，故名婆羅門聚落。
Those who have shaving tools, when the Buddha was staying in the Kusalanga country, it was called the Brahmin settlement.

摩訶羅父子持剃髮具出家，乃至佛言：「汝等云何剃髮人持作具與出家？
The Mahala father and son took shaving tools to leave the household, and the Buddha said: "How can you as shavers take tools to join the monastic life?

從今日後不聽合剃髮具與出家。」
From today on, it is not allowed to take shaving tools to join the monastic life."

若剃髮人持剃髮具欲求出家者，應語：「捨剃髮具，然後與汝出家。」
If those who shave want to leave the household life with shaving tools, they should be told: "Abandon the shaving tools, and then you can become a monk."

出家已後欲須時得從借用。
After becoming a monk, if needed, you can borrow.

如是鍛師、木師、金銀師、皮師、織師，如是工師比不聽持作具度出家。
Likewise, blacksmiths, carpenters, gold and silver smiths, leather workers, and weavers are not allowed to take tools to become monks.

若合度者，越比尼罪。
If they still do it, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名作具。
This is called tools.



破僧者，佛住舍衛城，時尊者優波離往至佛所，頭面禮足却住一面白佛言：「世尊說破僧，云何名破僧？」

When the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, Venerable Upāli approached the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and then stood to one side and said, "World-Honored One, you speak of dividing the Sangha; what does it mean to divide the Sangha?"

佛告優波離：「如大德比丘如法如律善解深理，是比丘應禮拜恭敬隨順法教。

The Buddha told Upāli, "When a senior monk, well-versed in the Dharma and the Vinaya, who deeply understands the profound principles, should be respected, venerated, and followed according to the teachings.

若比丘謂彼比丘所說非法、不隨順行，僧諍非破僧，乃至一界一住同說戒共作羯磨。

If a monk declares that what another monk expounds is not the Dharma and does not act in accord, it does not constitute dividing the Sangha, provided they perform the recitation of the precepts and karmic acts together in the same boundary and residence.

我已制一界一住中別作布薩自恣羯磨，是名破僧。」

I have prescribed that within one boundary and residence, performing separate observances, confession, and karmic acts is called dividing the Sangha."

尊者優波離復白佛言：「破僧者得何等罪？」

Venerable Upāli further asked the Buddha, "What sin does one incur by dividing the Sangha?"

佛言：「一劫泥犁罪。」

The Buddha said, "The sin of a hellish eon."

是名破僧。

This is called dividing the Sangha.



和合僧者，佛住舍衛城，爾時尊者優波離白佛言：「世尊說和合僧。

In the case of the harmonious assembly of monks, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, when Venerable Upali addressed the Buddha, saying, "World Honored One speaks of a harmonious assembly of monks.

云何名和合？」

How is it named harmonious?

佛告優波離：「我已制如大德比丘如法如律善解深理，是比丘應禮拜恭敬。

The Buddha said to Upali, "I have established that the venerable monks who understand the profound reasoning of the Dharma and Vinaya should be respected and revered.

諸比丘隨順行法，共一界住共一布薩自恣、共作羯磨，是名僧和合。」

When monks follow the rules together, reside within the same boundary, perform the Uposatha and Pravāraṇā together, and carry out Sanghakarma together, this is called a harmonious assembly of monks."

尊者優波離往至佛所，頭面禮足却住一面白佛言：「世尊！和合僧有何功德？」

Venerable Upali went to the presence of the Buddha, bowed down to his feet, stood to one side, and said, "World Honored One! What are the merits of a harmonious assembly of monks?"

佛言：「一劫善報。」

The Buddha said, "A kalpa of good fortune."

是名和合僧。

This is called a harmonious assembly of monks.




法藏者，佛住王舍城，爾時阿闍世王韋提希子與毘舍離有怨，如《大泥洹經》中廣說，乃至世尊在毘舍離於放弓杖塔邊捨壽，向拘尸那城熙連禪河側力士生地堅固林中雙樹間般泥洹，於天冠塔邊闍維，乃至諸天使火不然，待尊者大迦葉故。

Five hundred monks gathered the Dharma collection; the Buddha resided in the city of Rajagriha. At that time, King Ajatashatru, the son of Vaidehi, had enmity with Vaishali, as elaborated in the Mahaparinirvana Sutra. Eventually, the World-Honored One entered Nirvana between two sala trees in the forest near the Hiranyavati River by Kushinagar, and his body was cremated by the celestial crown stupa. Even the divine beings did not light the fire, awaiting the venerable Mahakasyapa.

時尊者大迦葉在耆闍崛山賓鉢羅山窟中坐禪。

At that time, the venerable Mahakasyapa was meditating in a cave on Mount Gridhrakuta near Mount Baibhar.

時尊者大迦葉作是念：「世尊已捨壽，欲何處般泥洹？今在何處？少病少惱安樂住不？」

The venerable Mahakasyapa thought, "The World-Honored One has passed away; where did he enter Nirvana? Where is he now? Is he dwelling peacefully with little illness or trouble?"

作是念已即入正受三昧，以天眼觀一切世界，見世尊在拘尸那竭城熙連河側力士生地堅固林中雙樹間，天冠塔邊闍維，乃至火不然。

With these thoughts, he entered deep meditation and used his divine vision to observe all worlds, seeing the World-Honored One between two trees in the robust forest near the Hiranyavati River in Kushinagar, where his body awaited cremation by the celestial crown stupa, and the fire was not yet lit.

見已慘然不悅，復作是念：「及世尊舍利未散，當往禮敬。」

Seeing this, he felt deeply saddened and thought, "Before the World-Honored One's relics are scattered, I must go to pay homage."

尋復念言：「我今往見世尊最後身，不宜乘神足往，宜應步詣。」

Then he thought, "As I go to see the World-Honored One's final body, it is not appropriate to travel by supernatural means; I should walk there."

時尊者大迦葉語諸比丘言：「諸長老！世尊已般泥洹，各持衣鉢共詣拘尸那竭禮覲世尊。」

The venerable Mahakasyapa told the monks, "Seniors! The World-Honored One has entered Nirvana; each of you take your robes and alms bowls to Kushinagar to pay homage to the World-Honored One."

諸比丘聞已皆言：「善哉！」

When the monks heard this, they all said, "Excellent!"

時尊者摩訶迦葉，即與眾多比丘俱詣拘尸那竭，路經一聚落。

Then the venerable Mahakasyapa, along with many monks, went to Kushinagar and passed through a village.

聚落中有一摩訶羅比丘，先在中住。

In the village, there was a monk named Mahara who had been living there.

尊者摩訶迦葉告摩訶羅言：「持衣鉢來，共汝詣拘尸那竭城禮覲世尊。」

The venerable Mahakasyapa told Mahara, "Bring your robe and alms bowl; let us go to the city of Kushinagar together to pay homage to the World-Honored One."

摩訶羅言：「長老大迦葉！且待前食後食訖，然後當去。」

Mahara replied, "Elder Mahakasyapa! Let us wait until after the meal, then we shall go."

迦葉答言：「不宜待食。」

Kasyapa replied, "It is not appropriate to wait for the meal."

摩訶羅勤勤至三，迦葉故言：「不宜待。」

Mahara repeatedly insisted three times, but Kasyapa said, "It is not appropriate to wait."

時摩訶羅恚言：「沙門有何急事怱怱乃爾？如死烏不直一錢，且待須臾，食已當去。」

At that time, Mahara said in anger, "What urgent matter does the monk have that requires such haste? Like a dead crow worthless even a penny; let's wait for a moment, and then we can go after the meal."

尊者大迦葉復言：「宜且置食，世尊今已泥洹，及未闍維，宜應速往。」

Venerable Mahakasyapa further said, "It is better to leave the meal aside; the World-Honored One has now entered Nirvana, and before his body is cremated, we should go quickly."

時摩訶羅聞佛已般泥洹，語尊者摩訶迦葉言：「我今永得解脫。所以者何？彼阿羅訶在時常言：『是應行、是不應行。』今已泥洹，應行、不應行自在隨意。」

When Mahara heard that the Buddha had entered Nirvana, he said to Venerable Mahakasyapa, "I am now completely liberated. Why? Because when the Arhat was present, he always said, 'This should be done, that should not be done.' Now that he has entered Nirvana, I am free to do and not do as I please."

時大迦葉聞此語已慘然不悅，即彈右指火出，右足蹈地。

Upon hearing this, Mahakasyapa became deeply displeased, immediately snapped his right finger producing fire, and stomped his right foot on the ground.

摩訶羅見已大怖而走。

Mahara, seeing this, was greatly frightened and fled.

乃至大迦葉往詣佛所，世尊即現兩足，從棺雙出。

Until Mahakasyapa went to where the Buddha was, the World-Honored One revealed his two feet, emerging from the coffin.

時尊者大迦葉見佛足已，偏袒右肩頭面作禮，說此偈言：

At that time, Venerable Mahakasyapa, having seen the Buddha's feet, bared his right shoulder, placed his head down in reverence, and spoke this verse


如來足踝滿，
The Tathagata's ankles are full,

千輻相輪現，
Thousand-spoked wheels manifest,




指纖長柔軟，  
Fingers are long and soft,

合縵網文成；  
Together they weave intricate patterns;




是故我今日，  
Therefore, today I,

頂禮最勝足。  
pay homage to the most exalted feet.




最胜柔软足，
The most excellent soft feet,

曾游行世间，
Once roamed the world,




大悲濟群生，
Great compassion saves all beings,

從今永不會；
From now on, we will never meet again;




是故我今日，  
Therefore, today I,

稽首如來足。  
bow my head at the feet of the Tathagata.




如來救濟我，
The Tathagata brings salvation to me,

解脫得應真，
Liberation is attained genuinely,




我今最後見，
This time I see you for the last time,

永已不復覲。
Never to meet again.




斷世眾疑惑，
Clearing the world's numerous doubts,

離欲中最上，
Foremost among those beyond desires,




利益一切众，  
Benefit all beings,  

无不得欢喜；  
So that none are without joy.  




是以我今天，　　向最尊貴的雙足叩拜。

Therefore today, I bow to the most revered feet.




佛有如是德，  
The Buddha has such virtues,  

善答決眾疑，  
Skillfully resolves the doubts of many,  




今日時已過，
Today time has passed,

慈慧光永滅；
Compassion and wisdom's light is forever extinguished;



是故我今日，  
Therefore, today I,

稽首最勝足。  
bow my head to the most excellent feet.




我證四真諦，
I have realized the Four Noble Truths,

說佛功德寶。
and speak of the treasures of the Buddha's virtues.




偈讚禮敬訖，　　還攝雙足入。
After the praise and respect are complete, he retracts his feet back in.




諸比丘各議言：「誰應闍維？」

The monks discussed among themselves: "Who should perform the funeral rites?"

時尊者大迦葉言：「我是世尊長子，我應闍維。」

At that time, the Venerable Mahākāśyapa said, "I am the eldest disciple of the World-Honored One, I should perform the funeral rites."

是時大眾皆言：「善哉！」即便闍維。

Then the assembly all said, "Well said!" and proceeded with the funeral rites.

闍維已，迦葉憶聚落中摩訶羅比丘語，乃至欲行便行、不行則止。

After the funeral rites, Kāśyapa recalled what Mahāloka, the monk, had said in the settlement, that they should proceed according to their wishes, and if they did not wish to proceed, they should stop.

即語諸比丘言：「長老！世尊舍利非我等事，國王、長者、婆羅門、居士眾求福之人自當供養。

He then said to the monks: "Elders! It is not our place to handle the World-Honored One's relics. The kings, elders, Brahmins, and laypeople who seek merits should be the ones to offer respect.

我等事者宜應先結集法藏，勿令佛法速滅。」

What we should do is to first compile the Dharma teachings, so that the Buddha's teachings do not disappear quickly."

尋復議言：「我等宜應何處結集法藏？」

Then they discussed again and said, "Where should we compile the Dharma teachings?"

時有言：「向舍衛。」者，有言：「向沙祇。」有言：「向瞻婆。」

At that time, some said, "To Śrāvasti," some said "To Śākya," and others said "To Campā."

有言：「向毘舍離。」有言：「向迦維羅衛。」

Some said "To Vaiśālī," and others said "To Kapilavastu."

時大迦葉作是言：「應向王舍城結集法藏。

At that time, Mahākāśyapa said, "We should go to Rājagṛha to compile the Dharma teachings.

所以者何？世尊記王舍城韋提希子阿闍世王，聲聞優婆塞無根信中最為第一，

Why? Because the World-Honored One praised King Ajātaśatru, son of Vaidehī of Rājagṛha, as the foremost among lay disciples with unwavering faith.

又彼王有五百人床臥供具，應當詣彼。」

Furthermore, that king has provided bedding and offerings for five hundred people, so we should go there."

皆言：「爾。」

They all said, "Yes."



世尊先語尊者阿那律言：「如來般泥洹，汝應守舍利，勿使諸天持去。
The World-Honored One first spoke to Venerable Aniruddha, saying: "When the Tathagata enters Parinirvana, you should guard the relics and not let the heavenly beings take them away.

所以然者，過去世時如來般泥洹，諸天持舍利去，世人不能得往，失諸功德。
The reason is that in the past, when the Tathagata entered Parinirvana, heavenly beings took the relics away, and people could not access them, losing various merits.

諸天能來人間供養，世人不能往彼，除其神足，是故應好守護。」侍者阿難復以供養故不去。
Heavenly beings can come to the human world to offer their respects, but people cannot go there, except with supernatural abilities, therefore, it should be well guarded." The attendant Ananda also did not leave because of his dedication to the offerings.




時大迦葉即與千比丘俱，詣王舍城至剎帝山窟，敷置床褥莊嚴世尊座。
At that time, Mahākāśyapa together with a thousand monks went to Rājagṛha at the Grdhrakūṭa cave and laid out carpets to adorn the seat of the World-Honored One.

世尊座左面敷尊者舍利弗座，右面敷尊者大目連座，次敷大迦葉座，
On the left of the World-Honored One's seat, the seat of the venerable Śāriputra was laid, on the right the seat of the venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, and next the seat of Mahākāśyapa.

如是次第安置床褥已辦四月供具，結集法藏故悉斷外緣。
Thus, in this order, the arrangement of seats was completed with offerings for the four months, assembling the Dharma treasury to cut off all external distractions.




大眾集已，中有三明六通德力自在者。

After the assembly gathered, among them were those who possessed the power of the three insights and six supernatural abilities.

於中有從世尊面受誦一部比尼者。

Among them, there were those who had personally received the recitation of the Vinaya from the Blessed One.

有從聲聞受誦一部比尼者。

There were those who had received the recitation of the Vinaya from the disciples.

有從世尊面受誦二部比尼者。

Some had received the recitation of two sections of the Vinaya directly from the Blessed One.

有從聲聞受誦二部比尼者。

Some had received two sections from the disciples.

眾共論言：「此中應集三明六通德力自在，從世尊面受誦二部比尼者、從聲聞受二部比尼者。」

The assembly discussed and said, "Here we should gather those with the power of three insights and six supernatural abilities, those who received two sections directly from the Blessed One or from the disciples."

集已數少二人，不滿五百。

The gathering was short by two people, not reaching five hundred.

復議言：「應滿五百。」

They further discussed, "It should be five hundred."

長老阿那律後到，猶少一人。

Elder Anuruddha arrived later, still short by one person.

時尊者大迦葉為第一上座。

At that time, the Venerable Mahākāśyapa was the chief elder.

第二上座名那頭盧。

The second elder was named Nadula.

第三上座名優波那頭盧。

The third elder was named Upanadula.

時尊者大迦葉自昇己座。

At that time, the Venerable Mahākāśyapa ascended to his seat.

唯留尊者舍利弗、目連阿難座已，諸比丘各隨次而坐。

Leaving only the seats for Venerables Sāriputta, Moggallāna, and Ānanda, the other monks took their seats in order.

時尊者大迦葉告尊者目連共行弟子梨婆提長老。

Then the Venerable Mahākāśyapa addressed the Venerable Moggallāna's fellow disciple, Elder Revata.

「汝至三十三天呼𠲿提那比丘來，世尊已般涅槃，比丘僧集欲結集法藏。」

"You should go to the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and call Bhikkhu Maudgalyāyana, as the Blessed One has entered Parinirvana, and the monk assembly wishes to compile the Dharma."

即受命往三十三天白：「長老！世尊已般泥洹，比丘僧集欲結集法藏故來相呼。」

Receiving the instruction, he went to the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and declared, "Elder! The Blessed One has passed into parinirvana, and the monk assembly wishes to compile the Dharma, so we have come to call you."

比丘聞已慘然不悅：「世尊已般泥洹耶？」

Upon hearing, the monk was deeply saddened: "Has the Blessed One really passed into parinirvana?"

答言：「爾。」

Replied, "Yes."

便言：「世尊在閻浮提者當往，世尊已般泥洹，世間眼滅。」

Then said, "While the Blessed One was present in Jambudvīpa, I would have gone. But as the Blessed One has passed into parinirvana, the world's eye has faded."

即以神足上昇虛空，入火光三昧以自闍維。

With spiritual power, he ascended into the sky and, entering the Fire Element Samadhi, cremated himself.

見已即還，來入僧中具說上事，乃至言入火光三昧。

After witnessing this, he returned, entered the assembly of monks, and fully recounted the events up until entering the Fire Element Samadhi.

復遣至三十三天尸利沙翅宮。

Again, he was sent to the Śrīkaṭa wings palace in the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.

呼憍梵波提。

He called for Gavampati.

次長老善見在香山、長老頗頭洗那在遊戲山。

Next, Elder Sudarśana was at Gandhamādana, and Elder Pothila was at Kulapavana.

長老拔佉梨在瞻婆山。

Elder Bhakkula was at Champaka Mountain.

復有長老欝多羅在淨山。

There was also Elder Uttara at the Pure Mountain.

尊者目連弟子名大光在光山。

The disciple of the Venerable Moggallāna, named Mahāprabhāsa, was at the Light Mountain.

尊者舍利弗弟子摩藪盧在慢陀山。

The disciple of the Venerable Sāriputta, named Maudgalaputra, was at Mandara Mountain.

尊者羅杜在摩羅山。

The Venerable Lodhur was at Malaya Mountain.

如是等乃至聞喚，皆般泥洹。

Thus, all of them heard the call and passed into parinirvana.

復遣使往毘沙門天宮。

He was again sent to the palace of Vaiśravaṇa.

喚修蜜哆，使至已作是言。

He called for Dharmakāya, who arrived and spoke these words.

「長老！世尊已般泥洹，比丘僧集欲結集法藏，故來相喚。」

"Elder! The Blessed One has passed into parinirvana, and the monk assembly wishes to compile the Dharma, so we have come to call you."

比丘聞已慘然不悅言：「世尊已般泥洹耶？」

Upon hearing, the monk was deeply saddened and said, "Has the Blessed One really passed into parinirvana?"

答言：「爾。」

Replied, "Yes."

便言：「世尊在閻浮提者我當詣彼，世尊般泥洹後世間眼滅。」

Then said, "While the Blessed One was present in Jambudvīpa, I would have gone. But as the Blessed One has passed into parinirvana, the world's eye has faded."

即以神足上昇虛空，入火光三昧以自闍維，入於般泥洹。

With spiritual power, he ascended into the sky, entered the Fire Element Samadhi, and entered parinirvana.

使還僧中具白僧如上，大迦葉言：「諸長老且止！勿復喚餘，諸聞喚者便自泥洹，若更喚者復當般泥洹，如是世間便空無有福田。」

The envoy returned to the monks and related the events as before. Mahākāśyapa said, "Elders, stop! Do not call any more, as those who hear the call pass into parinirvana, and if we continue, the world will be left empty without a field of merit."

有比丘言：「諸長老！尊者阿難是佛侍者，親受法教，又復世尊記阿難有三事第一，宜應喚來。」

A monk said, "Elders! Venerable Ānanda is the Buddha's attendant and personally received the teachings. Moreover, the Blessed One mentioned Ānanda as foremost in three things, so he should be called."

大迦葉言：「不爾！如此學人入無學德力自在眾中，猶如疥𭼦野干入師子群中。」

Mahākāśyapa said, "No! Such a learner joining a group of those with the Arhant's power is like a mangy jackal entering a pride of lions."



時尊者阿難料理供養訖，來到一聚落中作是言：「我今此中宿，明日當往王舍城。」

When the Venerable Ananda had finished preparing his offerings, he came to a village and said, "I will stay here tonight and go to Rajagriha tomorrow."

時有天來語阿難言：「大迦葉言：『尊者是疥𭼦野干。』」

Then a deity came and said to Ananda, "Mahakasyapa said, 'The venerable one is a mangy jackal.'"

阿難作是念：「世尊已泥洹，我今正欲依附。云何持我作疥𭼦野干？」

Ananda thought, "The Blessed One has entered Nirvana, and I now seek reliance. Why am I likened to a mangy jackal?"

心生不悅，復作是念：「是大迦葉，足知我眷屬姓字，正當以我結使未盡故作是言耳。」

He felt displeased and further thought, "Mahakasyapa knows my lineage well, and he says this because my defilements are not yet exhausted."

時尊者阿難勤加精進，經行不懈欲盡有漏。

The Venerable Ananda diligently increased his efforts, continuously walking in meditation, wishing to eradicate his defilements.

時尊者阿難以行道疲苦，又復世尊泥洹憂惱纏心，先所聞持不復通徹，

While walking, Venerable Ananda grew weary, and the sorrow of the Blessed One’s Nirvana weighed on his mind, causing what he had previously learned to become unclear.

尋作是念：「世尊記我，於現法中心不放逸，得盡有漏用太苦為？」

He then thought, "The Blessed One predicted I would be diligent in the present and eradicate defilements; why do I suffer so much for this?"

心不捨定傾身欲臥，頭未至枕得盡有漏，

Determined not to give up, just before his head touched the pillow, he eradicated all his defilements.

三明六通德力自在，即以神足乘空而去。

With mastery of the Three Knowledges and Six Supernatural Powers, he used his divine foot to travel through space.

到剎帝窟戶外，而說偈言：

He arrived outside the cave of Sakka’s palace and spoke a verse:



多聞有辯才，
The one who listens has eloquence,

給侍世尊者；
serving the World-Honored One;



瞿曇子阿難，　　今在門外立。
Ananda, son of Gautama, is now standing outside the gate.




由不與開門。
Let it not open the door.




又复说偈言：

And again, spoke the verse:

诸佛刹微尘，

The dust particles in the Buddha-lands,

三世一切尽，

All in the three periods of time,

譬如手中器，

Are like objects in one's hand,

终无能尽者，

Yet they can never be exhausted,

如来智慧海，

The wisdom sea of the Tathagata,

无量难思议，

Is immeasurable and inconceivable,

我今已究竟，

I have now ultimately,

乃至于彼岸。

Reached the other shore.




多闻利辩才，  
Skillful in listening and eloquence,

给侍世尊者，  
An attendant to the World-Honored One,




已捨結使擔，  
He had already put down his burden,

瞿曇子在外。」  
and Gautama's disciple was outside.




爾時大迦葉而說偈言：
At that time, Mahākāśyapa spoke these verses:




你放下烦恼的负担，    
You put down the burden of troubles,

说自己已经证悟，    
Claiming to have attained enlightenment,




未入瞿曇子，  
Not yet entering Gotama's son,  

來入瞿曇子。  
Then entering Gotama's son.  




阿難入已，禮世尊座訖次禮上座，到己座處便坐。
Ananda entered, paid respects to the Blessed One's seat, then to the senior monk, and then sat in his own seat.

時大迦葉語阿難言：「我不自高，亦不輕慢於汝，故作是言；但汝求道不進，欲使精勤盡諸有漏故，說此言耳。」
At that time, Mahakashyapa said to Ananda, "I do not consider myself superior, nor do I belittle you; I say this only because you are not advancing in the path. I urge you to strive diligently to eliminate all defilements; that is the reason for my words."

阿難言：「我亦知，但以我結使未盡，欲使勤進斷諸有漏。」
Ananda replied, "I understand, but since my defilements have not been fully eradicated, I wish to strive diligently to cut off all defilements."

時尊者大迦葉問眾坐言：「今欲先集何藏？」
At that time, the venerable Mahakashyapa asked the assembly, "Which collection should we gather first?"

眾人咸言：「先集法藏。」
Everyone unanimously said, "First gather the Dharma collection."

復問言：「誰應集者？」
He further asked, "Who should gather it?"

比丘言：「長老阿難。」
The monks replied, "Elder Ananda."

阿難言：「不爾，更有餘長老比丘。」
Ananda said, "No, there are other elder monks."

又言：「雖有餘長老比丘，但世尊記汝多聞第一，汝應結集。」
They said further, "Although there are other elder monks, the Blessed One extolled you as the foremost in hearing, so you should compile it."

阿難言：「諸長老！若使我集者，如法者隨喜，不如法者應遮。
Ananda said, "Elders! If I am to gather it, those who are in accordance with the Dharma can follow joyfully, but those not in accordance should stop.

若不相應應遮，勿見尊重而不遮，是義非義願見告語。」
If it does not conform, they should be stopped; do not refrain from stopping out of respect. Whether it is right or wrong, I hope to be informed."

眾皆言：「長老阿難！汝但集法藏，如法者隨喜，非法者臨時當知。」
Everyone said, "Elder Ananda! Just gather the Dharma collection; those who are aligned will rejoice, those who are not will know at the time."

時尊者阿難即作是念：「我今云何結集法藏？」
At that time, the venerable Ananda thought, "How should I now gather the Dharma collection?"

作是思惟已便說經言：「如是我聞，一時佛住欝毘羅尼連河側菩提曼陀羅。」
Having reflected thus, he recited the sutra, "Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was residing at Uruvilva by the side of the river Nerañjara under the Bodhi tree."

尊者阿難適說是語，五百阿羅漢德力自在者，上昇虛空咸皆喟歎：「我等目見世尊！今已言聞。」
As the venerable Ananda spoke these words, the five hundred Arhats, who had attained mastery, ascended into the sky and all sighed, "We have seen the Blessed One with our own eyes! Now we have heard his words."

悉稱南無佛已，還復本座。
All chanted "Homage to the Buddha," and returned to their original seats.

爾時阿難說此偈言：
At that time, Ananda recited this verse:



勤修習正受，  
Diligently practice right mindfulness,

見諸法生滅，  
See the arising and passing away of all phenomena,




知法從緣起，
Understanding the Dharma arises from dependent origination.

離癡滅煩惱。
Freeing oneself from ignorance extinguishes afflictions.




勤修习正受，  
Diligently practice right perception,

见诸法生灭，  
See the arising and passing of phenomena,




知法從緣起，
Understanding the law from dependent origination,

證諸法滅盡。
Realizing the cessation of all phenomena.




勤修习正受，   
Diligently practice right perception,

见诸法生灭，   
See the arising and ceasing of all phenomena,




知法從緣起，　　
Understanding the law comes from dependent origination,

摧伏諸魔軍。
Crushing and subduing all demon armies.




勤修習正受，  
Diligently practice right acceptance,

見諸法生滅，  
See the arising and ceasing of all phenomena,




知法從緣起，
Understanding the law comes from conditions arising,

如日除眾冥。
Like the sun dispelling all darkness.




尊者阿難誦如是等一切法藏，文句長者集為《長阿含》；
Venerable Ananda recited all these teachings, the longer texts were compiled into the "Dīrgha Āgama";

文句中者集為《中阿含》；
The medium-length texts were compiled into the "Madhyama Āgama";

文句雜者集為《雜阿含》，所謂根雜、力雜、覺雜、道雜，
The miscellaneous texts were compiled into the "Saṃyukta Āgama," including roots, powers, awakenings, and paths,

如是比等名為雜；
These were collectively referred to as miscellaneous;

一增、二增、三增乃至百增，隨其數類相從，集為《增一阿含》；
One increment, two increments, three increments up to a hundred increments, were sequentially compiled into the "Ekottarika Āgama";

《雜藏》者，所謂辟支佛、阿羅漢自說本行因緣，
The "Miscellaneous Collection" includes the stories of Pratyekabuddhas and Arhats explaining their past causes and conditions,

如是等比諸偈誦，是名《雜藏》。
These verses are collectively called the "Miscellaneous Collection".

爾時長老阿難說此偈言：
Then Elder Ananda spoke this verse:



所有八万诸法藏，
All of the eighty thousand teachings,

如是等法从佛闻，
These teachings are heard from the Buddha,




所有八万诸法藏，　　如是等法从他闻；
All eighty thousand Dharma collections, these kinds of teachings were heard from others;




如是等法我盡持，  
I completely uphold these teachings,

是佛所說趣泥洹。」  
which are spoken by the Buddha leading to Nirvana.




是名撰集諸法藏。
This is known as the compilation of all Dharma.




次問：「誰復應集比尼藏者？」

Next he asked, "Who should compile the Vinaya?"

有言：「長老優波離。」

Someone said, "Elder Upāli."

優波離言：「不爾，更有餘長老比丘。」

Upāli said, "No, there are other elder bhikkhus."

有言：「雖有長老比丘，但世尊記長老成就十四法，除如來、應供、正遍知，持律第一。」

Someone said, "Though there are elder bhikkhus, the Blessed One recorded that the elder achieved fourteen dharmas and is foremost in observing the precepts, except for the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One."

優波離言：「諸長老！若使我集者，如法者隨喜，不如法者應遮。」

Upāli said, "Elders! If I am to compile it, those in accordance with the Dharma should be welcomed, those not in accordance should be stopped."

若不相應應遮，勿見尊重，是義非義願見告示。」

"If they are not in accordance, they should be stopped, do not consider them respectful, please indicate what is right or wrong."

皆言：「長老優波離但集，如法者隨喜，非法者臨時當知。」

All said, "Elder Upāli, just compile it. Those in accordance with the Dharma are to be welcomed; for those not in accordance, we will know in time."

尊者優波離即作是念：「我今云何結集律藏？」

Venerable Upāli then thought, "How should I compile the Vinaya?"

五淨法，如法如律隨喜，不如法律者應遮。」

The five pure rules are to be welcomed if in accordance with the Dharma and Vinaya; those not in accordance should be stopped."

何等五？一、制限淨。

Which five? First, restriction purity.

二、方法淨。

Second, method purity.

三、戒行淨。

Third, precept conduct purity.

四、長老淨。

Fourth, elder purity.

五、風俗淨。

Fifth, custom purity.

制限淨者，諸比丘住處作制限，與四大教相應者用，不相應者捨，是名制限淨。

Restriction purity means that the monks establish restrictions in their dwelling places, using what accords with the four great teachings and discarding what does not; this is called restriction purity.

方法淨者，國土法爾，與四大教相應者用，不相應者捨，是名方法淨。

Method purity means that the natural laws of the land are used if they accord with the four great teachings, and discarded if not; this is called method purity.

戒行淨者，我見某持戒比丘行是法，若與四大教相應者用，若不相應者捨，是名戒行淨。

Precept conduct purity means that I observe a certain precept-holding bhikkhu practicing this Dharma which, if in accordance with the four great teachings, is used, and discarded if not; this is called precept conduct purity.

長老淨者，我見長老比丘尊者舍利弗、目連行此法，與四大教相應者用，不相應者捨，是名長老淨。

Elder purity means that I see elder bhikkhus, Venerable Śāriputra and Moggallāna, practicing this Dharma, which is used if in accordance with the four great teachings, and discarded if not; this is called elder purity.

風俗淨者，不得如本俗法非時食、飲酒、行婬，如是一切本是俗淨，非出家淨，是名風俗淨。

Custom purity means not adhering to worldly customs such as eating at inappropriate times, drinking alcohol, or indulging in sexual activities, as all these are originally worldly purity, not monastic purity; this is called custom purity.

如是諸長老！若如法者隨喜，若不如法應遮。」

Thus, elders! Those in accordance with the Dharma are to be welcomed, those not in accordance should be stopped."

諸比丘答言：「相應者用，若不相應者臨時應當遮。」

The bhikkhus replied, "Use those that are in accordance, those not in accordance should be stopped at the appropriate time."




時尊者優波離語阿難：「長老有罪，清淨眾中應當悔過。」
At that time, the Venerable Upali said to Ananda, "Elder, you have committed offenses and should confess them in the assembly."

阿難言：「有何等罪？」
Ananda said, "What offenses?"

答言：「世尊乃至三制不聽度女人出家，而汝三請，是越比尼罪。」
He replied, "The World-Honored One thrice refused permission for women to ordain, but you requested it three times, which is a transgression."

時尊者大迦葉擲籌置地言：「是第一籌。」
Then the Venerable Mahakasyapa threw a chip onto the ground and said, "This is the first chip."

即時震動三千大千世界。
Instantly, the three thousand great thousand worlds shook.

「復次佛在毘舍離，佛告阿難：『毘舍離般樂放弓杖塔可樂，若得四神足者可住壽一劫、一劫有餘。若佛在世，世人得見。』
"Furthermore, when the Buddha was in Vesali, the Buddha told Ananda: 'The recreational grounds, walkways, and stupas of Vesali are delightful, and if one attains the four bases of spiritual power, one may live for an eon, or even more. If the Buddha is in the world, people can see him.' 

汝言：『如是世尊！如是修伽陀！』汝不請佛住世，越比尼罪。」
You said, 'Yes, World-Honored One! Yes, Sugata!' Yet you did not request the Buddha to remain in the world, which is a transgression."

次擲第二籌。
He then threw a second chip.

「復次汝右脚指躡世尊僧伽梨衣縫，而汝不知是僧伽梨是諸天世人塔應恭敬耶？是越比尼罪。」
"Furthermore, you stepped on the edge of the World-Honored One’s robe with your right foot and you did not realize that the robe is revered by heavenly beings and humans. This is a transgression."

次下第三籌。
He then laid down a third chip.

「復次佛告阿難取水來，如是至三汝不與世尊取水，是越比尼罪。」
"Furthermore, the Buddha asked Ananda three times to fetch water, and you did not fetch water for the World-Honored One. This is a transgression."

下第四籌。
He then laid down a fourth chip.

「復次佛告阿難：『我臨般泥洹時當語我，我當為諸比丘捨細微戒。』而汝不白，越比尼罪。」
"Furthermore, the Buddha told Ananda: 'When I am nearing parinirvana, remind me, and I will relinquish the minor precepts for the monks.' But you did not announce this. It is a transgression."

下第五籌。
He then laid down a fifth chip.

「復次佛般泥洹，而汝以佛陰馬藏示比丘尼，是越比尼罪。」
"Furthermore, after the Buddha's parinirvana, you showed the Buddha's private parts to the bhikshunis. This is a transgression."

下第六籌。
He then laid down a sixth chip.

「復次佛般泥洹已，力士諸老母臨世尊足上啼，淚墮足上，汝為侍者不遮，是越比尼罪。」
"Furthermore, after the Buddha's parinirvana, a Layman’s mother wept at the feet of the World-Honored One, and her tears fell on his feet, yet you did not restrain her as an attendant. This is a transgression."

下第七籌。
He then laid down a seventh chip.




爾時阿難不受二罪，作是言：「長老！
At that time, Ananda did not commit the two offenses, and said, "Elder!

過去諸佛皆有四眾，是故三請度比丘尼。
All past Buddhas had four groups, hence I asked three times for the ordination of bhikkhunis.

佛在毘舍離，三告不請佛住世者，
When the Buddha was in Vesali, three times I failed to ask the Buddha to remain in the world,

我爾時是學人，為魔所蔽，是故不請。
At that time, I was a learner, obstructed by Mara, so I did not ask.

是中犯五越比尼罪。
Among this is the fault of breaking the five nissaggiya pācittiya rules.

長老！如法作已。」
Elder! Having acted in accordance with the law."




時尊者優波離作是言：「諸長老！是九法序。

At that time, the venerable Upāli said: "Elders, this is the sequence of nine laws.

何等九？一、波羅夷；二、僧伽婆尸沙；三、二不定法；四、三十尼薩耆；五、九十二波夜提；六、四波羅提提舍尼；七、眾學法；八、七滅諍法；九、法隨順法。

What are the nine? 1. Pārājika; 2. Saṅghādisesa; 3. Two undetermined laws; 4. Thirty Nissaggiya; 5. Ninety-two Pācittiya; 6. Four Pātidesanīya; 7. Various training laws; 8. Seven methods of resolving disputes; 9. Laws in accordance with the Dharma.

世尊在某處為某甲比丘制此戒不？」

Did the Blessed One establish these precepts at a certain place for a certain monk?

皆言：「如是優波離！如是優波離！」

They all said: "Yes, Upāli! Yes, Upāli!"

復言：「比尼有五事記。何等五？一者、修多羅；二、比尼；三、義；四、教；五、輕重。

He further said: "There are five records of the Vinaya. What are the five? 1. Sūtra; 2. Vinaya; 3. Meaning; 4. Teaching; 5. Light and Heavy.

修多羅者，五修多羅。

The Sūtra refers to the five Sūtras.

比尼者，二部比尼略廣。

The Vinaya refers to the concise and extensive versions of the two divisions of the Vinaya.

義者，句句有義。

The Meaning is that each sentence has significance.

教者，如世尊為剎利婆羅門居士說四大教法。

The Teaching is like the four major doctrines the Blessed One taught to the Kshatriyas, Brahmins, and laymen.

輕重者，盜滿五，重；減五，偷蘭遮。

Light and Heavy refers to five full thefts being serious; less than five is minor, as in stealing a Lancha.

是名五事記比尼。長老！如是應學。

These are called the five recorded Vinaya matters. Elders, this is how one should learn.

復有五比尼。何等五？一者略比尼；二者廣比尼；三者方面比尼；四者堅固比尼；五者應法比尼。

There are also five Vinayas. What are the five? 1. Concise Vinaya; 2. Extensive Vinaya; 3. Regional Vinaya; 4. Firm Vinaya; 5. Applicable Vinaya.

略比尼者，五篇戒。

The Concise Vinaya refers to the five sections of precepts.

廣比尼者，二部比尼。

The Extensive Vinaya refers to the two divisions of the Vinaya.

方面比尼者，輸奴、邊地聽五事。

The Regional Vinaya refers to five matters allowed in remote regions or borderlands.

堅固比尼者，受迦絺那衣捨五罪、別眾食乃至不白離同食。

The Firm Vinaya refers to relinquishing the five offenses regarding accepting Kaṭhina robes, not eating with the community separately, and failing to declare one's departure before eating together.

應法比尼者，是中法羯磨、和合羯磨，是名應法比尼，餘者非羯磨。」

The Applicable Vinaya refers to the lawful and harmonious proceedings known as Karma; others are not Karma.

如是集比尼藏竟。

Thus concludes the compilation of the Vinaya Piṭaka.




入，語言：「諸長老！如是集法藏、如是集比尼藏。」

He called a thousand monks in and said, "Elders! This is how the Dharma-pitaka and Vinaya-pitaka are compiled."

有比丘言：「諸長老！世尊先語阿難：『欲為諸比丘捨細微戒。』為捨何等？」

A monk said, "Elders! The Blessed One had previously told Ananda, 'I want to abandon the minor precepts for the monks.' What should be abandoned?"

有比丘言：「世尊若捨細微戒者，正當捨威儀。」

A monk said, "If the Blessed One were to abandon the minor precepts, then the rules of conduct should be abandoned."

有言：「不正捨威儀，亦當捨眾學。」

Some said, "Not only the rules of conduct, but also various teachings should be abandoned."

有言：「亦捨四波羅提提舍尼。」

Some said, "Also abandon the four offenses that require confession."

有言：「亦應捨九十二波夜提。」

Some said, "Also abandon the ninety-two 'Pacittiya' offenses."

有言：「亦應捨三十尼薩耆波夜提。」

Some said, "Also abandon the thirty 'Nissaggiya Pacittiya' offenses."

有言：「亦應捨二不定法。」

Some said, "Also abandon the two indefinite rules."

時六群比丘言：「諸長老！若世尊在者一切盡捨。」

At that time, a group of six monks said, "Elders! If the Blessed One were present, all could be abandoned."

大迦葉威德嚴峻猶如世尊，作是言：「咄！咄！莫作是聲。」

Great Kasyapa, with his awe-inspiring presence like the Blessed One, said, "Stop! Stop! Do not speak like that."

即時一切咸皆默然。

Immediately everyone fell silent.

大迦葉言：「諸長老！若已制復開者，當致外人言：『瞿曇在世儀法熾盛，今日泥洹法用頹毀。』

Great Kasyapa said, "Elders! If what has been established is now reopened, outsiders will say: 'When Gautama was in the world, the rules were flourishing, but today, they have decayed.'

諸長老！未制者莫制，已制者我等當隨順學。」

Elders! Do not establish what has not been established, but what has been established, we should follow and learn."




此法從何處聞？
Where did this teaching come from?

從尊者道力聞，《比尼》、《阿毘曇》、《雜阿含》、《增一阿含》、《中阿含》、《長阿含》。
It was heard from Venerable Daoli, the "Vinaya", "Abhidhamma", "Samyukta Āgama", "Ekottara Āgama", "Madhyama Āgama", and "Dīrgha Āgama".

道力復從誰聞？
From whom did Daoli hear?

從尊者弗沙婆陀羅聞。
It was heard from Venerable Vasubandhu.

尊者弗沙婆陀羅復從誰聞？
From whom did Venerable Vasubandhu hear?

從尊者法勝聞。
It was heard from Venerable Fa Sheng.

法勝從誰聞？
From whom did Fa Sheng hear?

從尊者僧伽提婆聞。
It was heard from Venerable Saṅghadeva.

僧伽提婆從誰聞？
From whom did Saṅghadeva hear?

從尊者龍覺聞。
It was heard from Venerable Longjue.

龍覺從誰聞？
From whom did Longjue hear?

從尊者法錢聞。
It was heard from Venerable Fa Qian.

法錢從誰聞？
From whom did Fa Qian hear?

從尊者提那伽聞。
It was heard from Venerable Dinaga.

提那伽從誰聞？
From whom did Dinaga hear?

從尊者法護聞。
It was heard from Venerable Dharma Protector.

法護從誰聞？
From whom did Dharma Protector hear?

從尊者耆婆伽聞。
It was heard from Venerable Kapaka.

耆婆伽從誰聞？
From whom did Kapaka hear?

從尊者弗提羅聞。
It was heard from Venerable Bhadrila.

弗提羅從誰聞？
From whom did Bhadrila hear?

從尊者耶舍聞。
It was heard from Venerable Yashas.

耶舍從誰聞？
From whom did Yashas hear?

從尊者差陀聞。
It was heard from Venerable Chanda.

差陀從誰聞？
From whom did Chanda hear?

從尊者護命聞。
It was heard from Venerable Protecting Life.

護命從誰聞？
From whom did Protecting Life hear?

從尊者善護聞。
It was heard from Venerable Good Protector.

善護從誰聞？
From whom did Good Protector hear?

從尊者牛護聞。
It was heard from Venerable Niu Protector.

牛護從誰聞？
From whom did Niu Protector hear?

從尊者巨舍羅聞。
It was heard from Venerable Jushala.

巨舍羅從誰聞？
From whom did Jushala hear?

從尊者摩求哆聞。
It was heard from Venerable Ma Qiuda.

摩求哆從誰聞？
From whom did Ma Qiuda hear?

從尊者摩訶那聞。
It was heard from Venerable Mahana.

摩訶那從誰聞？
From whom did Mahana hear?

從尊者能護聞。
It was heard from Venerable Energy Protector.

能護從誰聞？
From whom did Energy Protector hear?

從尊者目哆聞。
It was heard from Venerable Muduo.

目哆從誰聞？
From whom did Muduo hear?

從尊者巨醯聞。
It was heard from Venerable Jixi.

巨醯從誰聞？
From whom did Jixi hear?

從尊者法高聞。
It was heard from Venerable Fa Gao.

法高從誰聞？
From whom did Fa Gao hear?

從尊者根護聞。
It was heard from Venerable Root Protector.

根護從誰聞？
From whom did Root Protector hear?

從尊者耆哆聞。
It was heard from Venerable Jida.

耆哆從誰聞？
From whom did Jida hear?

從尊者樹提陀娑聞。
It was heard from Venerable Shutitasa.

樹提陀娑從誰聞？
From whom did Shutitasa hear?

從尊者陀娑婆羅聞。
It was heard from Venerable Dasapāla.

陀娑婆羅從誰聞？
From whom did Dasapāla hear?

從尊者優波離聞。
It was heard from Venerable Upali.

優波離從誰聞？
From whom did Upali hear?

從佛聞。
It was heard from the Buddha.

佛從誰聞？
From whom did the Buddha hear?

無師自悟更不從他聞。
He was self-enlightened without a teacher and heard from no one else.

佛有無量智慧，為饒益諸眾生故授優波離。
The Buddha, with his infinite wisdom, taught to benefit all beings, and thus imparted it to Upali.

優波離授陀娑婆羅，陀娑婆羅授樹提陀娑，樹提陀娑如是乃至授尊者道力，道力授我及餘人。
Upali passed it to Dasapāla, Dasapāla to Shutitasa, and Shutitasa continued to pass it down until it reached Venerable Daoli, who passed it to me and others.



我等因師教，
Because of the teacher's guidance,

從無上尊聞，
We have heard from the supreme one,




聞持誦比尼，　
Study and practice the Vinaya, 

賢聖所行法。
The path followed by the wise and virtuous ones.




世尊內法藏，  
The World-Honored One's inner treasury of the Dharma,

紹繼釋迦後，  
Inherits and continues after Shakyamuni,




各各共護持，  
Each one protects together,  

令法得久住。  
So that the Dharma may long endure.  



是名五百結集法藏竟。
This is called the completion of the Dharma treasury by the assembly of five hundred.




摩訶僧祇律卷第三十二
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll Thirty-Two




