inly, please provide the lines you wish to have translated


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
Scripture Information: Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō, Volume 22, No. 1425, Mahasanghika Vinaya




【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12
[Version Record] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

#【Editorial Note】This database is edited by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taisho Tripitaka".




蕭鎮國大德提供

Provided by Master Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain virtuous person in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

New punctuation provided by Master Shi Benchan




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱

[Other Matters] This database is freely available for distribution. Please refer to

【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

the Copyright Declaration of the Electronic Buddhist Canon Foundation Database for details.




inly! Please provide the lines you want translated, and I'll assist you with the translation


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十八東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯  
Mahasanghika Vinaya, Volume Twenty-Eight, Translated by Buddha Bhadra and Faxian from the Eastern Jin era of India.  




混元始於清微中

The chaos began in the midst of clarity and subtlety

元氣流形為三正靈

Primordial energy flows into the form of three sacred rulers

仰望太空接天界

Look up to the sky and connect to the heavenly realm

伏思無極成道淨

Contemplate the boundless and achieve the purity of the Dao




者，佛住俱睒彌瞿師羅園，為諸天世人之所供養。

The robe tradition was maintained by the Buddha residing at Jetavana, revered by celestial beings and humans.

爾時俱睒彌王夫人以五百張㲲奉上世尊，

At that time, the wife of King Prasenajit offered 500 robes to the Blessed One.

佛告阿難：「汝持是㲲與諸比丘。」

The Buddha told Ananda: "Take these robes and give them to the monks."

諸比丘不受，語阿難言：「世尊不聽畜長衣，用是㲲為？

The monks did not accept them and said to Ananda: "The Blessed One does not allow the keeping of extra robes, so what’s the use of these?"

浣染未竟已不如法。」

"The practice is not proper unless they are fully washed and dyed."

阿難以是因緣具白世尊。

Ananda reported the situation to the Blessed One.

佛告阿難：「從今已後長衣聽十日畜。」

The Buddha told Ananda: "From now on, extra robes can be kept for ten days."

諸比丘長衣滿十日，持是諸衣往白世尊：「此衣已滿十日。」

After ten days, the monks brought the robes and reported to the Blessed One: "These robes have reached the ten-day mark."

佛言：「從今已後聽受迦絺那衣。」

The Buddha said: "From now on, the kaṭhina robe may be accepted."


迦絺那衣者，時、眾僧、眾多人、一人、五事利、新、未受、不停、截淨、染淨、點淨、刀淨。
The robe of Kashina, at that time, the community of monks, the assembly of many people, one person, five benefits, new, not received, not staying, cut pure, dyed pure, dotted pure, knife pure.




時者，從七月十六日至八月十五日，是名時。
During this period, from July 16th to August 15th, it is called "Shiming".




眾僧者，僧作迦絺那衣不得與眾多人、不得與一人。
As for the monks, a monk making a Kathina robe may not give it to many people, nor to one person.

眾多人作迦絺那衣，不得與一人。
Many people making a Kathina robe may not give it to one person.




五事利者，離五罪。
The five advantageous actions are free from the five faults.

何等五？
What are the five?

別眾食、
Eating separately from the group,

處處食、
Eating everywhere,

食前食後行、
Moving around before and after meals,

不白畜長衣、
Keeping long robes without declaring them,

離衣宿，
Sleeping without covering oneself,

是名五事利。
These are called the five advantageous actions.




新者，新㲲。
New things bring new energy.




未受者，未曾受作三衣。  
"Those who have not received it have never been made into the three robes."  




不停者，淨施衣捨已，得作迦絺那衣、僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、覆瘡衣、雨浴衣，如是等諸衣及鉤刺未曾[隹/一/ㄙ]用，皆得作迦絺那衣。
He who continuously gives away pure offerings, can make kuti-hand-stitched robes, sanghati, uttarasanga, antaravasaka, pamsukula robes, and rains-bathing cloths as before, as well as clothing and hooks which have never been used, all can be made into kuti-hand-stitched robes.




截淨者，截縷作淨。
A separator of purity cuts threads to create purity.




染净者，

For the one who purifies the defilements,

染作净。

defilements turn into purity.




點淨者，點角作淨。
Refine the point, refine the corners to make it clean.




刀淨者，離角頭四指，於一處三下刀斷三縷，是名刀淨。
The term "knife purification" refers to a process where the knife is placed four fingers away from the corner head and makes three cuts at the same place to sever three strands; this is called knife purification.




若外人施僧迦絺那衣財，不得默然受。
If an outsider offers a monk the Kathina robe material, it cannot be accepted silently.

受者應作是說：「我今受僧迦絺那衣財。」
The recipient should say: "I now accept this Kathina robe material."

受已到僧中竪㲲，手捉長垂高擎，應作是說：
After receiving, it should be hung in the assembly, holding it aloft with a long drape, and this should be said:

「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣財，若僧時到，僧取此迦絺那衣財。白如是。」
"Great honorable monks, hear! The order has received this robe material, when the time comes, the order will take this Kathina robe material. Thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣財，僧今取此迦絺那衣財。
"Great honorable monks, hear! The order has received this robe material, the order now takes this Kathina robe material.

諸大德忍取此迦絺那衣財者默然，若不忍者便說。」
Those who consent to take this Kathina robe material, remain silent, if not, please speak."

「僧已取迦絺那衣財竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The order has taken the Kathina robe material, the order's silent consent retains this matter."

僧中有能料理作迦絺那衣者，若一人、若二人、若三人。
Among the monks, there may be one, two, or three capable of handling and making the Kathina robe.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣財，若僧時到，僧拜某甲、某甲比丘及餘人，作僧迦絺那衣。白如是。」
The Kamma-officer should say: "Great honorable monks, hear! The order has received this robe material, when the time comes, the order appoints monk such and such and others to make the Kathina robe. Thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣財，僧今拜某甲某甲比丘及餘人，作迦絺那衣。
"Great honorable monks, hear! The order has received this robe material, the order now appoints monk such and such and others to make the Kathina robe.

諸大德忍某甲、某甲比丘及餘人作迦絺那衣者默然，若不忍者便說。」
Those who consent to monk such and such and others making the Kathina robe, remain silent, if not, please speak."

「僧已忍拜某甲、某甲比丘作迦絺那衣竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The order has silently consented to appoint monk such and such to make the Kathina robe, thus retaining this matter."

羯磨人中一人為主受衣財時，應作是言：「受此迦絺那衣財，僧當受。」
Among the Kamma-officers, when one takes the lead to receive the robe material, they should say: "Receiving this Kathina robe material, the order shall accept."

如是三說。
It should be said three times.

浣時應作是說：「浣是迦絺那衣，僧當受。」
During washing, it should be said: "Washing this Kathina robe, the order shall accept."

如是截時、縫時、染時、點作淨時，隨所作如上說。
The same applies for cutting, sewing, dyeing, and marking for purification, according to the above statement.

刀淨者，離角頭四指，一下刀時作是說：「此迦絺那衣，僧當受。」
For knife purification, four finger-widths from the edge should be cut, and it should be said: "This Kathina robe, the order shall accept."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third times should also be said like this.

作淨時一一應作是說，不說而作淨，得名迦絺那衣，得越毘尼罪。
During purification, it should be said each time; if not said, a purified robe still named Kathina is an infraction of the Vinaya.

若一一說而不作淨，不名迦絺那衣，得越毘尼罪。
If said but not purified, it is not named Kathina robe, leading to an infraction of the Vinaya.

若一一起心而作淨，得名迦絺那衣，無罪。
If intention and purification coincide, it is named Kathina robe without fault.

若僧得時，衣作已，一切和合。
When the order has the time and the robe is made, all should assemble.

羯磨人縱疊衣，手捉長垂高擎，應作是說：
The Kamma-officer should fold the robe, raise it high with a long drape, and say:

「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣作竟，若僧時到，僧受此迦絺那衣。白如是。」
"Great honorable monks, hear! The order has completed the making of this robe, when the time comes, the order will receive this Kathina robe. Thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！僧得此時衣作竟，僧今受此迦絺那衣。
"Great honorable monks, hear! The order has completed the making of this robe, the order now receives this Kathina robe.

諸大德忍受此迦絺那衣者默然，若不忍者便說。」
Those who consent to receive this Kathina robe, remain silent, if not, please speak."

「僧已受迦絺那衣竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The order has received the Kathina robe, the silent consent of the order holds this matter."

應襞疊此衣著箱中，眾華散上，應從上座次第作隨喜言：
The robe should be folded and stored in the box, flowers scattered upon it, and from the senior in order express gratitude:

「長老憶念！僧於此住處受迦絺那衣，我某甲比丘隨喜受，齊冬四月，隨所住處滿，我當捨。」
"Elders recall! The order in this residence received the Kathina robe, I, monk such and such, rejoice in accepting it until the fourth month of winter, upon completion of my residence, I shall relinquish it."

如是三說。
It should be said three times.

若大眾一萬、二萬，和合難者，眾多人得別作迦絺那衣，一切如大眾，但稱眾多為異。
If a large assembly of ten thousand or twenty thousand makes consensus difficult, many can separately make the Kathina robe, all according to the great assembly, only calling it different for the multitude.

四人以上不得別作。
Four or more cannot separately make it.

若一人獨作者，取時應言：「此迦絺那衣財我今受。」
If one is making it alone, upon taking, they should say: "This Kathina robe material I now accept."

如是三說。
It should be said three times.

截時、縫時、浣時、染時、點時、刀淨時，截時，應作是言：
During cutting, sewing, washing, dyeing, marking, and knife purification, during cutting, it should be said:

「此迦絺那衣我當受。」
"This Kathina robe I shall accept."

縫時、浣時、染時、點時、刀作淨時如上說。
During sewing, washing, dyeing, marking, and knife purification, proceed as said above.

作成已，應心念口言：「我比丘某甲受此迦絺那衣。」
Upon completion, in mind and speech it should be said: "I, monk such and such, receive this Kathina robe."

如是三說。
It should be said three times.



受迦絺那衣者，有作時非受時、有受時非作時、有作時受時、有非作時非受時。
The one who receives the Kaṭhina robe may have a time of making but not receiving, a time of receiving but not making, a time of making and receiving, and a time of neither making nor receiving.

作時非受時者，是中有值作時受、不值受時受，得名受。
When making time is not receiving time, among these there are those who receive it during making time, not during receiving time, and it is called receiving.

受時非作時者，值受時受、非作時受，得名受。
When receiving time is not making time, receiving it during receiving time, not during making time, it is called receiving.

有作時受時者，值作時受時受，是名作時受時。
There is a time of making and receiving, where receiving occurs during both making and receiving times, and it's called making and receiving time.

非作時非受時者，不值作時受、受時受，
Neither a making time nor a receiving time, not receiving in making time, receiving in receiving time,

應隨喜言：「長老憶念！是住處僧受迦絺那衣，我某甲比丘隨喜受，齊冬四月，隨彼住處滿，我當捨。」
should express joy saying: "Venerable, remember! At this residence, monks receive the Kaṭhina robe, I, Bhikkhu So-and-so, joyfully receive it, until the end of the fourth winter month, then I will relinquish it."

是名迦絺那衣法。
This is called the Kaṭhina robe practice.




非迦絺那衣者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

For non-Kathina cloth, when the Buddha was staying in the city of Śrāvastī, he explained it widely as above.

爾時尊者孫陀羅難陀，持頭鳩羅(生疎也)作迦絺那衣，佛言：「不聽頭鳩羅作迦絺那衣。」

At that time, Venerable Sundarananda took a rough head kerchief to make Kathina cloth, and the Buddha said, "Do not allow head kerchiefs to be made into Kathina cloth."

爾時尊者阿難，持䩸劫貝作迦絺那衣。

Then Venerable Ananda took a piece of silk brocade to make Kathina cloth.

復有比丘，持小段物作；復有比丘，持故物作；復有比丘，持䍧羊毛欽婆羅作；

There was a monk who used small pieces of material; another monk used old material; another monk used coarse wool blankets;

復有比丘，持髮欽婆羅作；復有比丘，持草衣作；復有比丘，持韋衣作；

Another monk used hair blankets; another monk used grass clothing; another monk used leather clothing;

復有比丘，持樹皮衣作；復有比丘，持板衣作。

Another monk used tree bark clothing; another monk used board clothing.

佛言：「如是一切不應作。一切非衣，不名迦絺那衣。」

The Buddha said, "None of these should be used. They are not real clothing, and cannot be called Kathina cloth."

復有不名迦絺那衣，非時作，不截縷淨、不染淨、不點淨、不刀淨，是不名迦絺那衣。

Moreover, if not made at the proper time, without properly cut threads, without proper dyeing, without proper decoration, or without proper cutting, it cannot be called Kathina cloth.




捨迦絺那衣法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The rule for abandoning the kaṭhina robe: when the Buddha was residing in Sravasti, he explained as above.

爾時有比丘數易衣著，食前著異衣、食後著異衣，佛知而故問：「汝衣數數異，是誰衣？」
At that time, a monk often changed his robes, wearing different ones before and after meals; the Buddha knowingly asked, "Whose robes are those that you frequently change?"

答言：「世尊！是我衣。」
He replied, "World-Honored One! These are my robes."

佛言：「何故太多？」
The Buddha asked, "Why so many?"

答言：「我受迦絺那衣。」
He replied, "I have received the kaṭhina robe."

佛言：「汝云何一切時受迦絺那衣？從今日後應捨。」
The Buddha said, "How can you always receive the kaṭhina robe? From today on, you should abandon it."

捨者有十事。
There are ten cases for abandoning.

何等十？
What are the ten?

一、衣竟捨；二、受時捨；三、時竟捨；四、聞捨；五、送捨；六、壞捨；七、失捨；八、出去捨；九、時過捨；十究竟捨。
First, abandonment after the robe is finished; second, abandonment at the time of receiving; third, abandonment after the time is expired; fourth, abandonment upon hearing; fifth, abandonment when sending; sixth, abandonment when ruined; seventh, abandonment when lost; eighth, abandonment when leaving; ninth, abandonment when past the time; tenth, final abandonment.

衣竟捨者，受迦絺那衣時作是念：「我作衣竟，當捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment after the robe is finished, when receiving the kaṭhina robe, one should consider, "After making this robe, I will abandon the kaṭhina robe."

作衣成已即名捨，是名衣竟捨。
After the robe is made, it is called abandonment; this is abandonment after the robe is finished.

受時捨者，作是念：「受此衣時當捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment at the time of receiving, one should consider, "When receiving this robe, I will abandon the kaṭhina robe."

受衣時即名捨，是名受時捨。
At the time of receiving the robe, it is called abandonment; this is abandonment at the time of receiving.

時竟捨者，作是念：「爾許時我當捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment after the time is expired, one should consider, "At such time, I will abandon the kaṭhina robe."

期滿已即名捨，是名時竟捨。
When the time limit is reached, it is called abandonment; this is abandonment after the time is expired.

聞捨者，作是念：「我聞和上、阿闍梨捨迦絺那衣時，我當捨。」
For abandonment upon hearing, one should consider, "When I hear the teacher or preceptor abandoning the kaṭhina robe, I will abandon it."

後聞和上、阿闍梨說：「今日僧捨迦絺那衣。」爾時即名捨，是名聞捨。
Upon later hearing the teacher or preceptor say, "Today the monks abandon the kaṭhina robe," it is termed abandonment; this is abandonment upon hearing.

送捨者，作是念：「我是衣與他已，當捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment when sending, one should consider, "Having given this robe to others, I will abandon the kaṭhina robe."

後送衣已即名捨，是名送捨。
After sending the robe, it is termed abandonment; this is abandonment when sending.

壞捨者，受迦絺那衣已，中間自言：「我今捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment when ruined, after receiving the kaṭhina robe, during the period, proclaim oneself, "I now abandon the kaṭhina robe."

作是語時即名捨，是名壞捨。
When making this declaration, it is termed abandonment; this is abandonment when ruined.

失捨者，作是念：「是衣中間壞敗失不現，我當捨。」
For abandonment when lost, one should consider, "If this robe is ruined, lost, or no longer visible, I will abandon it."

後衣壞敗若失即名捨，是名失捨。
When the robe is later ruined or lost, it is termed abandonment; this is abandonment when lost.

出去捨者，作是念：「我此中住，出去時當捨迦絺那衣。」
For abandonment when leaving, one should consider, "While residing here, when I leave, I will abandon the kaṭhina robe."

若出去時即名捨，是名出去捨時。
At the time of leaving, it is termed abandonment; this is abandonment when leaving.

過捨者，臘月十五日不捨，至十六日即名捨，越毘尼罪，是名時過捨。
For abandonment when past the time, if not abandoned by the fifteenth day of the twelfth month and abandoned on the sixteenth, it is called abandonment, violating the Vinaya rule; this is abandonment when past the time.

究竟捨者，至臘月十五日應捨，一人僧中應作是唱：「大德僧聽！今日僧捨迦絺那衣。」
For final abandonment, by the fifteenth day of the twelfth month, it should be abandoned; one should announce among the monks, "Venerable Sangha, listen! Today the Sangha abandons the kaṭhina robe."

如是三說，是名究竟捨。
This statement is made three times; this is called final abandonment.

是十事名捨迦絺那衣法。
These ten cases are called the rules for abandoning the kaṭhina robe.



衣法者，安居未竟、安居竟，是中安居、畏失命、畏失梵行、非時衣、時衣、俱睒彌。
In terms of clothing rules, whether the retreat is incomplete, or the retreat is complete, during the retreat, fearing loss of life, fearing the loss of pure conduct, non-seasonal clothes, seasonal clothes, all apply.




安居未竟者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
For those who have not completed the retreat, the Buddha was residing in Shravasti, and he elaborated as above.

爾時六群比丘聚落中安居未竟，至檀越所作是言：「長壽！與我安居衣施。」
At that time, six groups of monks, having not completed the retreat in the village, approached a patron and said, "Long-life! Give us robes for the retreat."

答言：「尊者！今非時，待安居竟。收穫訖，人民歡喜念恩故生施心，爾時乃可有施耳。」
The patron replied, "Venerable ones! Now is not the time, wait for the retreat to end. After the harvest, when people are joyful and grateful, they give with generous hearts. Only then can there be donations."

比丘言：「長壽！汝不知世間無常，或王、或水火、偷劫，如是我則失利，汝便失福。」
The monks said, "Long-life! Do you not know that the world is impermanent? Either the king, water, fire, or thieves may cause us loss, and you will lose merit."

檀越言：「尊者！但示我無常而自不見。尊者！欲速得安居物，為持餘處去？為欲罷道怱怱乃爾？奇哉！可怪！多欲無厭。」
The patron said, "Venerable ones! You show me impermanence but do not see it yourself. Do you want to quickly obtain things for the retreat to take them elsewhere, or are you hastily trying to abandon the path? How strange! How remarkable! Such endless greed."

發不喜心已而去。
He left with displeasure in his heart.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾世尊！」
They replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！汝云何安居未竟索安居施衣？」
The Buddha said, "Monks! How can you ask for robes for the retreat when it is not completed?"

自今以後，不聽安居未竟索安居施衣者，越毘尼罪。」
From now on, those who seek retreat robes before completing the retreat commit a transgression against the Vinaya."

是名安居未竟。
This is called not completing the retreat.



安居竟者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
When the retreat concluded, the Buddha dwelt in the city of Sravasti, explaining extensively as above.

爾時諸比丘祇桓精舍安居竟分安居衣。
At that time, the monks at the Jetavana Monastery completed their retreat and distributed the retreat robes.

時六群比丘餘處安居已，來在坐中，作如是言：
Then six groups of monks who had completed their retreat elsewhere came to the assembly and said:

「長老！世尊制安居竟應得安居衣，我亦安居竟應得安居衣，與我安居衣分。」
"Elders, the Blessed One has decreed that the retreat robes should be received at the conclusion of the retreat; I have also completed my retreat and should receive a portion of the robes. Please share the retreat robes with me."

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter completely to the Blessed One.

佛言：「餘處安居，不應得此處衣分，隨安居處受分。」
The Buddha said, "Those who completed their retreat elsewhere should not receive a share of the robes from this place. They should receive their share according to where they conducted their retreat."

是名安居竟。
This is the conclusion of the retreat.



，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
During the rainy season retreat, the Buddha resided in Śrāvastī, explaining in detail as mentioned above.

爾時六群比丘至安居時，受房舍已，著革屣、染具及餘小小物，置房中已作是言：
At that time, upon the arrival of the rainy season retreat, the six groups of monks received quarters, put on shoes, dyed their robes, and placed miscellaneous small items in their rooms, saying:

「諸長老！我此中安居，莫復起厭患，我知汝等常不喜我。」
"Venerable elders, I am residing here during the retreat, do not bear any grievances. I know you all do not usually like me."

即倩人取安居衣分，便餘處安居。
Then they had someone take their share of the retreat robes and moved to reside elsewhere.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「要是中安居，是處受衣分。」
The Buddha said, "One should reside here during the retreat and receive the robe share at this place."



畏失命者，  
Those who fear losing their lives,

无以守生。  
Have no way to preserve their lives.




，廣說如上。  
The Buddha stayed at Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

爾時毘舍離大飢饉乞食難得，諸比丘趣舍衛城，值祇桓比丘安居竟分衣。  
At that time, Vaisali was suffering from a severe famine, and it was difficult to obtain alms. The monks went to Shravasti and encountered the monks at Jetavana, who had completed their retreat and were dividing robes.

毘舍離比丘在座中，祇洹比丘問言：「長老！世尊制要是處安居得是處衣分，汝何處安居？」  
The Vaisali monks were among them when a Jetavana monk asked, "Elder! The Blessed One has established rules that allow receiving robe portions where one has been residing in retreat; where did you reside in retreat?"

答言：「長老！我畏失命故來，若不來者便飢死。」  
They replied, "Elder! I came here fearing for my life. If I hadn't come, I would have starved to death."

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。  
The monks reported this matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「若為失命故來，應與衣分。」  
The Buddha said, "If someone came fearing for their life, they should be given a share of the robes."

是名畏失命。  
This is called fearing for one's life.


畏失梵行者，爾時王舍城中有外道兒出家，時父母欲罷兒道，餘人言：「沙門重安居，安居中必無東西，爾時可罷。」

For those afraid of losing their sacred practice, at that time in the city of Rajgir, there was a non-believer's child who renounced worldly life. His parents wanted to stop him, and others said, "Monks value the retreat, during which they don't go anywhere, so that would be the time to stop him."

其姊深信佛法，語弟言：「父母欲罷汝道，可速避去。」

His sister deeply believed in the Buddha's teachings and told her brother, "Our parents want to stop your practice, you should leave quickly."

弟即趣舍衛，值祇桓比丘安居竟分衣。

The brother immediately went to Shravasti, where he met Jivaka Bhikkhu, who was concluding the retreat and distributing robes.

是比丘在座中，祇桓比丘問言：「長老！世尊制要是處安居，是處受衣分，畏失命來者得分。

This monk was sitting there, and Jivaka Bhikkhu said to him, "Elder! The Blessed One established that during the retreat, robes are distributed, and those afraid of losing their life by coming late should receive a share.

汝云何答言：『父母欲罷我道，若不來者失梵行。』」

How do you respond to this matter: 'My parents want to stop my practice, and if I do not come, I will lose my sacred practice.'"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks reported this matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「畏失梵行來者，應與衣分。」

The Buddha said, "Those who come for fear of losing their sacred practice should be given a share of the robes."

是名畏失梵行。

This is known as the fear of losing sacred practice.




非時衣者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

In the case of non-timely clothing, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti and expounded extensively as above.

爾時有比丘在人間遊行，載滿車衣來。

At that time, there was a monk roaming among the people, bringing a cart full of robes.

佛知而故問：「是誰衣？」

The Buddha, knowing, purposefully asked, "Whose robes are these?"

答言：「世尊！是我衣。」

He replied, "World Honored One! These are my robes."

復問：「此是時衣、為非時衣？」

The Buddha asked again, "Are these timely robes or non-timely robes?"

答言：「世尊！非時衣。」

He replied, "World Honored One! These are non-timely robes."

「淨施未？」

"Have you purified the offering yet?"

答言：「未。」

He replied, "Not yet."

佛言：「是一切衣應與眾僧。」

The Buddha said, "All these robes should be given to the Sangha."

是名非時衣。

This is called non-timely robes.




時衣者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
At that time, the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, expounding broadly as stated above.

爾時有比丘人間遊行，載滿車衣來。
At that time, there was a monk who was traveling among people, bringing a cart full of robes.

佛知而故問：「是誰衣？」
The Buddha knew and deliberately asked, "Whose robes are these?"

答言：「世尊！是我衣。」
He replied, "World-Honored One! These are my robes."

復問：「此是時衣、非時衣？」
The Buddha further asked, "Are these timely robes or untimely robes?"

答言：「時衣。」
He replied, "Timely robes."

佛言：「是衣太多，減半與僧。」
The Buddha said, "These robes are too many, reduce by half and give to the monks."

是名時衣。
This is called timely robes.



俱睒彌者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
At Sravasti, the Buddha taught in detail as previously stated.

俱薩羅國抄俱睒彌聚落至舍衛城，有諸比丘先依此聚落安居，即便隨來。
From Kusala to Sravasti, there were monks who first resided in this settlement and came along.

時祇桓比丘到此聚落，索安居施衣。
At that time, the monk Jihuan arrived at this settlement and requested a robe for the retreat.

俱睒彌比丘言：「長老！我先依此聚落安居，我應先索。」
The monk Kumarami said, "Elder, I resided in this settlement first, so I should request first."

二人諍已共詣佛所，以是因緣具白世尊。
The two disputed and went together to the Buddha to detail the matter.

佛言：「是中安居應先索，然後餘人索；若二人共索者應共分。」
The Buddha said, "In residence, the first should request, then the others; if both request together, they should share."

若是中安居比丘未索，餘人索者，越毘尼罪。
If a monk has not requested residence and others do, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

復次時尊者劫賓那，有二共行弟子，有所嫌故捨戒，不壞梵行還受具足。
Additionally, Venerable Kabinna had two fellow disciples who, due to disagreement, abandoned the precepts but later fully observed them without breaking the holy practice.

時祇桓比丘安居竟分衣，不與分，彼作是言：
At that time, after the retreat, Jihuan did not divide the robes with him, and he said:

「長老！我有所嫌故捨戒，不壞梵行還受具足，應與我分。」
"Elder, I abandoned the precepts due to issues but later fully observed without breaking the holy practice, so I should be included."

共往白佛。佛言：「有所嫌故捨戒，不壞梵行還受具足，應等與分。」
They went to the Buddha, who said, "Due to issues, abandoning the precepts, but later fully observing without breaking the holy practice, should be equally included."

佛言：「有五事不應與。何等五？被舉、罷道、無常、破安居、去不囑。」
The Buddha said, "There are five conditions under which one should not be included: being expelled, cessation, impermanence, disrupting the retreat, and leaving without assigning."

舉者，三見中若一一見：
To expel someone, if any one of three views is held:

謗線經、惡邪見、邊見，諫不捨作舉羯磨，是名舉。
Slandering the sutras, holding wrong views, or not abandoning fringe views after admonishment, expulsion is enacted.

罷道者，捨戒不應與，若依王力、若依大臣力、若依賊黨力，作是說：
Cessation is if giving up precepts and relying on king, minister, or group force, saying:

「沙門若不與我分，我當作不饒益事。」
"If the monks don't include me, I will cause harm."

如是人雖不應得，應與，是名罷道。
Such a person, though undeserving, should be included, known as cessation compliance.

無常者，死不應得分，
Impermanence means the deceased should not receive a portion,

安居衣已集雖未分，命垂終時囑與某甲，死已應與，是名無常。
If robes collected during retreat are not divided, and if he assigns them before dying, they should be given, known as impermanence.

破安居者，比丘不前安居、不後安居，不應得；
Disrupting the retreat means a monk who does not participate in the initial or closing retreat should not be included;

若依王力、大臣力、賊力，若不與我者，當作不饒益事，如是人雖不應得，應與。
If relying on king, minister, or group force to threaten, should include even if undeserving.

去不囑者，不囑取衣分而去者，不應與。
Leaving without assigning means if he did not assign a person to receive robes and left, he should not be included.

分物人應問：「誰取某甲分？」
The person dividing should ask, "Who will take so-and-so's share?"

若有取者應問：「去時囑取不？」
If someone claims to take it, ask, "Did he assign you before leaving?"

答言：「不囑。」應語言：「汝莫憂是事。」
If answered "Not assigned," say, "Do not worry about this matter."

若言：「囑。」者，應相前人。
If "Assigned," recognize this person.

若是可信人者應與，若非是可信人者，應語言：「汝莫憂是事。」
If trustworthy, should be included, if not, say, "Do not worry about this matter."

若二人先是同意，常相為取者應與。
If two people previously agreed to take for each other, should be included.

是名五事。
These are the five conditions.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining as above.

爾時有一比丘安居竟，往至本生聚落，諸親里以此比丘來故，廣設供養布施衣物。
At that time, a monk finished his retreat and went to his native village, where his relatives, because of his arrival, made extensive offerings of clothing and other items.

此聚落中先住安居僧，以坐後施故，不與是比丘分。
The monks who had already resided during the retreat in this village did not share with this monk because the offerings were given afterward.

諸親里問言：「得衣分不？」答言：「不得。」
The relatives asked, "Did you receive a share of the clothing?" He replied, "No."

諸親里言：「我為汝故設此供養，何故不得？」
The relatives said, "I arranged these offerings for you, why did you not receive anything?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「檀越為此比丘設供，應與分。」
The Buddha said, "The layperson arranged offerings for this monk, he should be given a share."

佛言：「有五聲施：是衣施安居僧、是衣直施安居僧、是物施安居僧、是物直施安居僧、是處安居者施，是名五。」
The Buddha said, "There are five named offerings: clothing offering to the retreat monks, direct clothing offering to retreat monks, item offering to retreat monks, direct item offering to retreat monks, and offering to the place of retreat, these are the five."

若施家欲通與餘比丘，隨檀越意，應與。
If the donor wishes to include other monks, it should be according to the donor's intention.

復有四種物隨語應屬現前僧。
There are four types of items that, following the statement, should be given to the present monks.

何等四？
What are the four?

我施衣、衣直、物、物直，是名四種物屬現前僧。
They are: I offer clothing, direct offering of clothing, items, direct items; these are the four types of items assigned to the present monks.

復有十種得應屬現前僧。
There are ten kinds that should be given to the present monks.

何等十？
What are the ten?

時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡壽藥、死比丘物、施住處、大會、非時衣、雜物、請食。
They are: timely medicine, nighttime medicine, seven-day medicine, lifetime medicine, deceased monk's belongings, offered residence, gatherings, out-of-time clothing, miscellaneous items, offering of meals.

時藥者，前食、後食、哆波那食，現前僧應得，是名時藥。
Timely medicine refers to food given before or after meals, and the dabba food that the present monks should receive; this is called timely medicine.

夜分藥者，十四種漿應廣說，是名夜分藥。
Nighttime medicine refers to fourteen kinds of drinks that should be described in detail; that is called nighttime medicine.

七日藥者，酥、油、蜜、石蜜、生酥、膏應廣說，是名七日藥。
Seven-day medicine refers to ghee, oil, honey, rock sugar, raw ghee, and ointment, which should be elaborated; these are called seven-day medicine.

盡壽藥者，呵梨勒、鞞醯勒、阿摩勒，如第二戒中廣說，是名盡壽藥。
Lifetime medicine is haritaki, bibhitaki, amalaki, which are elaborated in the second rule; this is called lifetime medicine.

死比丘物者，若比丘死時，所有衣鉢雜物，現前僧應得，是名死比丘物。
The belongings of a deceased monk, including all robes, bowls, and miscellaneous items, should be received by the present monks; these are called the belongings of a deceased monk.

施住處者，若檀越作僧房精舍已設大會，以此住處及餘雜物施，現前僧應得，是名住處施。
Residence offering refers to a layperson creating a monastic residence and setting up a gathering, offering this residence and other miscellaneous items, which should be received by the present monks; this is named residence offering.

大會者，佛生大會、菩提大會、轉法輪大會、阿難大會、羅睺羅大會、五年大會，是中施物，現前僧應得。
Great gatherings such as the Buddha's birth gathering, Bodhi gathering, Turning the Wheel of Dharma gathering, Ānanda gathering, Rāhula gathering, and the five-year gathering, the offerings given therein should be received by the present monks.

非時衣者，無迦絺那衣十一月，有迦絺那衣七月，於中施物，現前僧應得，是名非時衣。
Out-of-time clothing refers to robes not given during the Kaṭhina period in eleven months, given during the Kaṭhina period in seven months, wherein offerings should be received by the present monks; this is called out-of-time clothing.

雜物者，鉢、鉢支𨥌、腰帶、刀子、鍼筒、革屣、盛油革囊、軍持、澡瓶，如是比雜物施，現前僧應得，是名雜物。
Miscellaneous items such as bowls, bowl stands, belts, knives, needle cases, leather sandals, oil bags, water filters, and washbasins; offering such items, the present monks should receive these; these are called miscellaneous items.

請食者。檀越請現前僧食次第往，是名請食。
Offering of meals is where the donor invites the present monks to a meal in sequence; this is called the offering of meals.

是名十事現前僧應得。
These are the ten things that should be received by the present monks.



復次佛住王舍城，

Again, the Buddha was staying in the city of Rajagaha,

爾時諸比丘不截縷作衣，

At that time, the monks did not cut thread to make robes,

廣說如上波夜提三種壞色中說。

As is extensively explained above regarding the three types of damaged colors mentioned in the Vinaya.




復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Further, the Buddha stayed in Śrāvastī, explaining extensively as above.

爾時有一比丘，往至佛所頭面禮足白佛言：「世尊！聽我著一衣，少欲少事。」
At that time, a monk went to the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and said, "World-Honored One! Allow me to wear one robe, to have fewer desires and activities."

佛告比丘：「汝持三衣瓶鉢，即是少欲少事。」
The Buddha told the monk, "You should keep three robes and a bowl; this is truly having fewer desires and activities."

復有比丘言：「聽我著三衣。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear three robes."

復有比丘言：「聽我著䍧羊毛欽婆羅。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a woolen Kṣauma robe."

復有比丘言：「聽我著髮欽婆羅。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a garment made of hair."

復有比丘言：「聽我著馬尾欽婆羅。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a robe made of horsehair."

復有比丘言：「聽我著草衣。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a grass robe."

復有比丘言：「聽我著樹皮衣。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a bark robe."

復有比丘言：「聽我著韋衣。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to wear a leather robe."

佛言：「如是諸衣盡不應著。」
The Buddha said, "None of these garments should be worn."

復有比丘言：「聽我裸形，少欲少事。」
Another monk said, "Allow me to go naked, to have fewer desires and activities."

佛言：「比丘！此是外道法，應持三衣瓶鉢，即是少欲少事。」
The Buddha said, "Monk! This is the practice of non-Buddhist paths. You should keep three robes and a bowl; this is truly having fewer desires and activities."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was dwelling in the city of Śrāvastī, expounding as above.

爾時諸比丘著上色衣，為世人所嫌：「云何沙門釋子著上色衣，如俗人無異。」
At that time, some monks wore brightly colored robes, which people disliked, saying, "Why do the Śramaṇa, sons of the Śākya, wear brightly colored robes, indistinguishable from laypeople?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter in detail to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「不聽著上色衣。」
The Buddha said, "I do not permit wearing brightly colored robes."

上色者，丘佉染、迦彌遮染、俱鞞羅染、勒叉染、盧陀羅染、真緋欝金染、紅藍染、青染、皂色華色，一切上色不聽。
Bright colors include khouka dye, kāmiṣa dye, kuviḷāla dye, rakśā dye, rudhira dye, true scarlet dye, crimson saffron dye, red-blue dye, green dye, black, floral colors, and all bright colors that are not allowed.

應用根染、葉染、華染、樹皮染，下至巨磨汁染。
One should use root dye, leaf dye, flower dye, bark dye, or even coarse grinding juice dye.



復次佛住王舍城，天帝釋石窟前經行，見摩竭提稻田畦畔分明差互得所。
Again, the Buddha was residing in Rajagriha, walking in front of Indra's stone cave, and saw the neatly arranged fields and paths of Magadha.

見已語諸比丘：「過去諸佛、如來、應供、正遍知衣法，正應如是。從今日後作衣當用是法。」
Having seen this, he told the monks: "The past Buddhas, Tathagatas, worthy of worship, and perfectly enlightened ones used this method for making robes. From today onwards, you should also use this method."

復次爾時尊者大迦葉作僧伽梨，世尊自手捉、尊者阿難為截。
At that time, the venerable Mahakasyapa made a monastic robe, which the World-Honored One held with his own hands, and the venerable Ananda cut.

復有比丘篸綴、有比丘刺短、有比丘刺長、有比丘刺緣、有比丘安紐緤。
There were monks sewing patches, some stitching short, some long, some edges, some adding decorative buttons.

復次有比丘作衣畫作葉，佛言：「不聽畫作葉。」
There was a monk painting leaves on a robe; the Buddha said, "Do not paint leaves."

有比丘疊作葉，佛言：「不聽疊作葉，應割截。」
There was a monk folding leaves; the Buddha said, "Do not fold leaves, you should cut."

有比丘對頭縫，佛言：「不聽對頭縫，應作葉，極廣齊四指，極狹如𪍿麥。」
There was a monk sewing head to head; the Buddha said, "Do not sew head to head, make leaves, which should be as wide as four fingers, as narrow as millet."

復有比丘一向作葉，佛言：「不聽，應兩向。」
There was a monk making leaves in one direction; the Buddha said, "Not allowed, it should be in two directions."

有比丘作衣橫葉相當，佛言：「不聽。五條應一長一短，七條乃至十三條兩長一短，十五條三長一短。」
There was a monk aligning horizontal leaves on a robe; the Buddha said: "Not allowed. For five strips, one should be long and one short; for seven to thirteen strips, two long and one short; for fifteen strips, three long and one short."

復有比丘作衣縫葉與衣相著，佛言：「不聽。」
There was a monk sewing leaves onto clothes, the Buddha said, "Not allowed."

後衣宣脫，佛言：「應作馬齒。」
Later, when robes frayed, the Buddha said, "They should be made like horse's teeth."

有比丘衣上下破，佛言：「應作緣。」
A monk's robe was torn top and bottom; the Buddha said, "It should be edge-sewn."

有比丘作四種色衣，佛言：「不聽，應一種色。」
A monk made robes of four colors; the Buddha said, "Not allowed, it should be one color."

有比丘得上色衣欲浣壞色，佛知而故問：「比丘！欲作何等？」
A monk received a richly colored robe and wanted to wash it to a duller color. Knowing this, the Buddha asked, "Monk, what do you want to do?"

答言：「世尊制不聽著上色衣，欲浣壞色。」
He replied, "The World-Honored One rules against wearing richly colored robes, so I want to wash it to a dull color."

佛言：「不須浣，聽餘染壞色。」
The Buddha said, "No need to wash it; permission is given to dye it another dull color."

衣者有七種：一、欽婆羅衣；二、劫貝衣；三、芻摩衣；四、俱舍耶衣；五、舍那衣；六、麻衣；七、軀牟提衣。
There are seven types of robes: 1. Khambala robe; 2. Karavira robe; 3. Kusuma robe; 4. Kosheya robe; 5. Kshauma robe; 6. Linen robe; 7. Kumbhatika robe.

是名衣法。
This is called the robe-making method.




布薩及羯磨、  
Recitations and rituals,

與欲說清淨、  
For the sake of purity,  




安居并自恣、

Retreat and self-indulgence,

受迦絺那衣、

Receive the Kathina robe,




非迦絺那衣、
It is not a Kāṣāya.

捨迦絺那衣、
To give up the Kāṣāya.




安居竟施衣。
When the dwelling is complete, the clothes are given.

第四跋渠竟。
The fourth, Baqu has ended.




，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Regarding the rule for sick monks, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti and elaborated as above.

佛語阿難：「取戶鑰來，如來欲按行僧房。」
The Buddha said to Ananda, "Bring the key to the door, the Tathagata wishes to visit the monks' quarters."

答言：「善哉！世尊。」即取戶鑰隨世尊後。
Ananda replied, "Very well, World-Honored One." He promptly took the key and followed behind the World-Honored One.

時世尊到一破房中，見有一病比丘臥糞穢中不能自起。
At that time, the World-Honored One arrived in a dilapidated room and saw a sick monk lying in filth, unable to get up.

佛問比丘：「氣力何似？所患增損？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "How is your strength? Has your illness increased or decreased?"

答言：「世尊！患但有增無損。」
The monk replied, "World-Honored One! My illness only increases, it does not decrease."

復問比丘：「今日得食不？」
The Buddha further asked the monk, "Did you get any food today?"

「不得。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「昨日得不？」
"Did you have any yesterday?"

「不得。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「先昨得不？」
"The day before yesterday, did you get any?"

「不得。世尊！我不得食來已經七日。」
"No, World-Honored One! I have not received any food for seven days."

佛問比丘：「為得已不食？為不得不食？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "Are you not eating despite receiving food, or because you have not received it?"

答言：「不得。世尊！」
Replied, "I have not received any, World-Honored One!"

佛問比丘：「汝此間有和上不？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "Do you have a mentor here?"

「無有。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「有同和上不？」
"Do you have a co-mentor?"

「無有。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「有阿闍梨不？」
"Do you have a teacher?"

「無有。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「有同阿闍梨不？」
"Do you have a co-teacher?"

「無有。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「無比房比丘耶？」
"Among the monks in your quarters, is there truly no one?"

答言：「世尊！以我臭穢，不憙故徙餘處去。我孤苦。世尊！我孤獨。修伽陀！」
He replied, "World-Honored One! Because I am so filthy and unpleasant, others have moved elsewhere. I am lonely, World-Honored One! I am alone. Practice diligently!"

佛語比丘：「汝莫憂惱，我當伴汝。」
The Buddha spoke to the monk, "Do not worry, I will accompany you."

佛語比丘：「取衣來，我為汝浣。」
The Buddha said to the monk, "Bring your robes, let me wash them for you."

爾時阿難白佛言：「置，世尊！是病比丘衣，我當與浣。」
At that time, Ananda addressed the Buddha, "Let it be, World-Honored One! I will wash the sick monk's robes."

佛語阿難：「汝便浣衣，我當灌水。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "Then, you wash the robes, and I will pour water."

阿難即浣，世尊灌水，浣已日曝。
Ananda washed, the World-Honored One poured water, and after washing, they dried the robes in the sun.

時阿難抱病比丘舉著露地，除去糞穢，
At that time, Ananda carried the sick monk to an open space, removing the filth and impurities.

出床褥諸不淨器，水灑房內，
He brought out bedding and other unclean items, splashing water inside the room.

掃除已巨磨塗地，浣曬床褥，
After sweeping and polishing the floor, he washed and dried the bedding.

更織繩床敷著本處。澡浴病比丘，徐臥床上。
He rethreaded the rope bed and placed it in its original position. He bathed the sick monk and gently laid him on the bed.

爾時世尊以無量功德莊嚴金色柔軟手摩比丘額上，問言：「所患增損？」
At that time, the World-Honored One, with his golden, soft hand adorned with immeasurable virtue, stroked the monk's forehead and asked, "Has your illness increased or decreased?"

比丘言：「蒙世尊手至我額上，眾苦悉除。」
The monk said, "With the World-Honored One's hand upon my forehead, all my suffering has vanished."

爾時世尊為病比丘隨順說法發歡喜心已，重為說法，得法眼淨。
At that time, the World-Honored One preached the Dharma to the sick monk, instilling joy in his heart, and upon preaching again, the monk obtained the pure Dharma eye.

比丘差已，世尊至眾多比丘所，敷尼師壇而坐，以上事具為諸比丘說，
After the monk recovered, the World-Honored One went to the assembly of many monks, spread his mat, and sat down, explaining the previous circumstances in full to the monks.

問：「比房比丘是誰？」
He asked, "Who is the monk responsible for these quarters?"

答言：「我是。世尊！」
One replied, "I am, World-Honored One!"

佛告比丘：「汝等同梵行人，病痛不相看視，誰當看者？
The Buddha told the monks, "You are fellow practitioners, if you do not care for each other during illness, who will do so?

汝等各各異姓、異家，信家非家、捨家出家，皆同一姓沙門釋子，
You are of different clans, different homes, having left your familial homes to join the monastic community, you all share the same lineage of the Shramana, being sons of the Shakyan sage.

同梵行人不相看視，誰當看者？
If you, fellow practitioners, do not look after each other, who else will?

比丘！譬如恒河、遙扶那薩羅摩醯，流入大海，皆失本名合為一味，名為大海。
Monks! Just as the Ganges and Yamuna rivers flow into the great ocean, losing their original names and merging into one taste, known as the great ocean.

汝等如是，各捨本姓，皆同一姓沙門釋子。
You are like this, having given up your original surnames, all sharing the singular lineage of the Shramana, sons of the Shakyan sage.

汝等不相看視，誰當相看？
If you do not look after each other, who will do so?

譬如剎利、婆羅門、鞞舍、首陀羅，各各異姓，共入大海皆名海商人。
Just like the Kshatriyas, Brahmins, Vaishyas, and Shudras, each having different surnames, but when entering the great ocean, all are called seafarers.

如是比丘！汝等各各異姓、異家，信家非家、捨家出家，
So too, monks! You come from different clans and homes, having left familial homes for the monastic life,

皆同一姓沙門釋子，不相看視誰當看者？
all share the same lineage of the Shramana, being sons of the Shakyan sage. If you do not care for each other, who will?

若比丘病，和上應看；若無和上，同和上應看；
If a monk is sick, the mentor should take care of him; if there is no mentor, the co-mentor should take care of him;

若不看者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not care, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

若有阿闍梨，阿闍梨應看；若無阿闍梨，同阿闍梨應看；
If there is a teacher, the teacher should take care of him; if there is no teacher, the co-teacher should take care of him;

若不看者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not care, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

若有同房，同房應看；若無同房，比房應看；
If there is a co-resident, the co-resident should take care; if there is no co-resident, the quarters monk should take care;

若不看者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not care, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

若無比房者，僧應差看，隨病人宜須幾人，應與。
If there is no quarters monk, the assembly should appoint caretakers according to the needs of the sick monk.

若不看者，一切僧越毘尼罪。」
If one does not care, all monks are in violation of the Vinaya."

佛語比丘：「汝還看本比房病比丘去。」
The Buddha told the monk, "Return to your quarters and look after the sick monk."

去佛不遠，佛化作一病沙彌，佛言：「汝通看是病沙彌，此即福罰汝。」
Not far from the Buddha, he transformed into a sick novice monk, saying, "Go see this sick novice, and this will be your reward and punishment."



衛城，廣說如上。
Again, the Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and elaborated as above.

爾時南方有二比丘，共來問訊世尊！
At that time, two monks from the south came together to inquire about the Blessed One.

道中一比丘病，一比丘待經二三日，語病比丘言：「我欲並去問訊世尊！汝差已後來。」
On the way, one monk fell ill, and the other waited for two to three days, saying to the sick monk, "I want to go ahead to inquire about the Blessed One. You can come after you recover."

病比丘言：「長老！待我差已共去。」
The sick monk said, "Elder! Please wait until I recover, and let us go together."

答言：「長老！我不見世尊，久思慕如渴，不容相待，汝差已後來。」
He replied, "Elder! I have longed to see the Blessed One like a thirst. I cannot wait. You can come after you recover."

彼比丘來詣佛所，頭面禮足却住一面，佛知而故問：「汝何處來？」
That monk came to where the Buddha was, bowed at the feet, and stood aside. The Buddha, knowing, intentionally asked, "Where have you come from?"

比丘以上因緣具白世尊。
The monk explained the cause and circumstances to the Blessed One.

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事。
The Buddha said, "Monk! This is an evil deed.

若有比丘，心懷放逸懈怠不精進，不能執持諸根馳騁六欲，雖近我所為不見我，我不見彼。
If there is a monk with a negligent, lazy, and non-diligent mind, unable to restrain the faculties, indulging in the six desires, even if he is near me, he does not see me, and I do not see him.

若有比丘能執諸根心不放逸，專念在道，雖去我遠即為見我，我亦見彼。
If there is a monk who can restrain the faculties and is not negligent, focused on the path, even if he is far from me, he sees me, and I see him.

所以者何？隨順如來法身故、破壞諸惡故、離貪欲故、修寂靜故。
Why is this? Because he accords with the Dharma body of the Tathagata, destroys all evils, is free from desires, and cultivates tranquility.

汝等比丘同出家修梵行，汝不相看誰當看者？汝還看病比丘去。」
You monks have left the household life to practice the holy life. If you don't look after each other, who will? Now, return and look after the sick monk."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

Again, the Buddha resided in Śrāvastī, extensively speaking as above.

爾時鉢羅真國有二比丘，共作伴來問訊世尊，至蜂聚落一比丘病，一比丘待經二、三日，語病比丘言：

At that time, there were two monks from the country of Baladya, traveling together to inquire of the Blessed One. When they reached Bhramaragha, one of the monks fell ill. After waiting for two or three days, the healthy monk said to the sick one:

「我欲並去，問訊世尊。汝差已徐來。」

"I wish to go together to visit the Blessed One. Once you get better, you can come leisurely."

病比丘言：「長老！待我差已共去。」

The sick monk said, "Elder! Wait for me to recover, then we can go together."

答言：「長老！我不見世尊，久思慕如渴，不容相待。」

The other replied, "Elder! I have not seen the Blessed One for a long time, longing like thirst, I cannot wait."

病比丘言：「汝必欲去者，可為我囑質帝利居士。」

The sick monk said, "If you really wish to go, please entrust my affairs to the layman Devaputra."

比丘即往至居士所，作是言：「長壽！我二人從遠來欲往詣佛，今一人得病，欲權留此。長壽！為我經紀所須，我欲前行問訊世尊。」

The monk then went to the layman and said, "Long-lived one! We have come from afar intending to visit the Buddha. Now one of us has become ill and wishes temporarily to stay here. Long-lived one! Please take care of my necessities. I wish to proceed and visit the Blessed One."

居士言：「尊者！宜住共相看視，差已俱去。」

The layman said, "Venerable sir! It would be proper to stay and take care of each other, and once healed, travel together."

答言：「居士！不爾，我不見佛久，思慕如渴。」

The monk replied, "Layman! No, I have not seen the Buddha for a long time, longing like thirst."

居士言：「尊者去，世尊但當遣還，徒自疲勞。」

The layman said, "Venerable sir, go. The Blessed One will just send you back, and you will be unnecessarily exhausted."

比丘故去，往至佛所，頭面禮足却住一面。

The monk nevertheless went, arrived at the Buddha’s presence, honored him with bowed head, and then stood to one side.

佛知而故問：「汝從何來？」

The Buddha, knowing, still asked, "Where have you come from?"

比丘以上因緣具白世尊。

The monk reported the entire matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事。汝等各各異姓，信家非家、捨家出家，同一釋種，病痛不相看視，誰當看者？汝還看病比丘去。」

The Buddha said, "Monk! This is a bad matter. Though you are from different families, you left home to join the same Śākya clan; if you do not care for the sick, who will? Return to tend to the sick monk."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Then the Buddha stayed in Śrāvastī and spoke extensively as above.

爾時有一比丘從北方來欲問訊世尊，
At that time, a monk came from the north to ask about the World-Honored One.

聞道邊有病比丘即作是念：「世尊制戒，病者應看，
He heard that there was a sick monk by the road and thought, "The World-Honored One has established rules, the sick should be cared for,

我若見者不得前進。」
if I see them I should not proceed."

即迴道而去，
So he turned back and left the path,

往到佛所，頭面禮足却住一面。
He went to the Buddha, bowed with his head at the feet, and stood aside.

佛知而故問：「汝從何來？」
The Buddha knew and deliberately asked, “Where do you come from?”

答言：「世尊！我從北方來。」
He answered, "World-Honored One! I came from the north."

「從何道來？」
“Which path did you take?”

答言：「從某道來。」
He answered, "From a certain path."

佛言：「有何因緣捨正道從迴道來？」
The Buddha said, "Why did you forsake the right path and come back on another path?"

比丘以上因緣具白世尊。
The monk explained the reason to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事，
The Buddha said, "Monk! This is a bad thing,

如是乃至汝還看病比丘去。」
Go back and tend to the sick monk."



看病比丘法者，若比丘共商人行至曠野得病，同伴比丘不得相捨，應當將去，代擔衣鉢，應親近扶接不應遠離。
Regarding the rule for sick monks, if a monk traveling with merchants falls ill in the wilderness, the fellow monk must not abandon him but should assist, help carry his robes and bowl, and stay close.

若不能行者，應從商人賈借乘駄，作如是言：「長壽！是出家人病，不堪及伴，為我載致使得脫難。」若得者善。
If he cannot walk, they should borrow a ride from the merchants, saying, "Sir, this monk is sick and cannot continue, please help us by transporting him." It's good if they agree.

若言：「尊者！我乘重。」應言：「長壽！我當與穀草直。」若得者，不得載牸牛車乘草馬等，當載特牛車乘䭸馬。
If they say, "Noble one, my load is heavy," they should reply, "I'll give you grain and hay." If granted, specific animals or carts should be used, avoiding female cattle carts and grass-fed horses.

若病篤無所分別者，趣乘無罪。
If the illness is severe and choices are limited, any ride can be taken without fault.

若乘不可得者，應留能看病人，若一人、若二人、若三人：「汝看病人，我到聚落當求乘來迎。」應留糧食，使住者不乏。
If a ride can't be found, leave one, two, or three attendants: "You care for the patient, I'll seek transportation from the village." Leave enough provisions for their stay.

若各言：「誰能棄身命於曠野？」無肯住者，不得便爾捨去，應作菴舍，敷草蓐、作烟火、與取薪水，留時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡壽藥，語病者言：「長老！安意住，我到前聚落，當求乘來迎。」
If they all decline saying, "Who can risk life in the wilderness?" they must not abandon him. Build shelter, spread grass matting, make a fire, provide wood and water, leave medicines for various periods, and say, "Elder, rest here, I'll seek help from the village."

到聚落中不得繞塔、問訊和上阿闍梨，應語聚落中諸比丘言：「曠野中有病比丘，共迎去來。」若言：「在何處？」答言：「某處。」
Upon reaching the village, don't circle the stupa or greet the elders; inform local monks, "A sick monk is in the wilderness, let's bring him." If asked, "Where?" reply, "A certain place."

若言：「彼處多有虎狼，恐當食盡，萬無一在。」雖聞此語不得便住，要當往看。
If they say, "There are many tigers and wolves, he might be eaten, it's unlikely he's alive," despite hearing this, you must go check.

若遙見烏鳥，不得便還，要到其所。若已死者應供養尸，若活者應將至聚落語舊比丘言：「長老！此是某處病比丘，我於曠野供養已，今來至此，次長老看。」
If from a distance, you see birds, don't return immediately; go to the spot. If he's dead, perform last rites. If alive, escort him to the village and tell senior monks, "Elder, this is a sick monk from a certain place; I've attended to him, please take over."

若不看者，越比尼罪。若無比丘，應語優婆塞：「長壽！曠野中有病比丘，借我乘往迎。」
If they refuse, it's a violation. If no monk is there, tell a lay follower, "Sir, there's a sick monk in the wilderness, lend me transportation to bring him."

檀越言：「在何處？」如是乃至迎來至檀越家，安別障處。若人多，應取二、三人能看病者看。
If the donor asks, "Where?" proceed until he is brought to the donor's house for shelter. If many are present, two or three should be chosen to care for him.

若病人言：「須多人樂住。」者，應盡住，共勸化，索前食、後食、時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡壽藥，供給使無渴乏。
If the patient says, "I need more people," they should all stay, encouraging support, and ensure he lacks nothing by providing meals and medicinal needs.

若有客比丘來者，不得便語：「長老！汝看病比丘。」應言：「善來長老！」應代擔衣鉢、為敷床座、與水洗足及塗足油。
If a guest monk arrives, don't immediately say, "Elder, care for the sick monk." Instead say, "Welcome, Elder!" Take over carrying his belongings, prepare a bed, offer water to wash and oil for the feet.

若時來者應與前食、後食，若非時來者應與非時漿。止息已應語言：「長老！是病比丘我看已久。長老！次復應看。」
Offer timely meals to those arriving on time, and drinks for those arriving at other times. Once rested, say, "Elder, I have long cared for this sick monk. Now it's your turn."

若無常者，應供養舍利。若比丘、比丘尼共商人行，若比丘尼病，比丘不得捨去，應語：「去！去！姊妹將接之。」宜如比丘中說，唯除抱撮。
If he dies, relics should be venerated. If a monk is traveling with a nun and she falls sick, he must not leave her; instead, say, "Go, go! Sisters will care for you." Follow the guidelines stated for monks, except for carrying.

若須按摩油塗身者，應倩女人為之。若無常者，彼有衣鉢應雇人闍維，若無者應捨去。
If body massage or oils are needed, hire a woman. If she dies, employ someone for cremation if funds exist; if not, proceed without.

有俗人嫌言：「何以留是死尸去？」若能作地想者，應擔著遠處。
If laypeople complain, "Why leave a corpse?" those who can should carry it far away.




爾時尊者優波離白佛言：「世尊！若大德比丘病者，當云何看視？」

At that time, Venerable Upāli said to the Buddha: "World-Honored One! If a venerable monk is ill, how should he be cared for?"

佛告優波離：「大德比丘病，不得著邊陋小房中、不得著避迴處，應著顯現房中。

The Buddha told Upāli: "A venerable monk who is sick should not be placed in a remote or small room, nor in a secluded spot; he should be in a visible room.

共行弟子、依止弟子常侍左右，掃灑房中巨磨塗地，燒眾名香勿令臭穢，敷置床座。

His accompanying disciples or dependents should always be by his side, sweep and sprinkle the room, smear the floor with a great millstone, burn various incense to prevent bad odors, and arrange the bed and seat.

若比丘來問疾者，應與前食、後食，非時來者，應與非時漿。

If a monk comes to inquire about the illness, he should be given food before and after. For one who comes at an inappropriate time, he should be given non-regular nourishment.

若有問事，病者應答。病人力劣，應侍者答。

If there are questions, the sick person should respond. If the patient is too weak, the attendant should answer.

若優婆塞來問訊者，應言：『善來長壽！』語令就座而為說法：

If lay devotees come to inquire, they should be told, 'Welcome, may you have a long life!' and be invited to sit and listen to the Dharma:

『汝大得功德。如世尊說：「看持戒病比丘，如看我無異。」』

'You will gain great merit. As the World-Honored One said: "Caring for a sick monk who upholds the precepts is like caring for me."'

若有供養，為呪願受。若病人患下，問疾者不得久停，應速發遣。

If offerings are given, accept them with blessings. If the patient has a bowel complaint, those inquiring should not linger and should depart quickly.

若病人不能出，應畜三除糞器：一授病人、一持出、一洗已油塗日曝，如是迭用。

If the patient cannot leave, three excrement containers should be kept: one for the patient, one to be carried out, and one for cleaning, oiling, and sun-drying, to be used in rotation.

一人應戶邊住，莫令人卒入。一人在病人邊住，時時為隨順說法。

One should stay by the door to prevent sudden entries. Another should stay by the patient, occasionally giving compliant Dharma talks.

如是優波離！大德比丘病，應如是看視。」

Thus, Upāli! When a venerable monk is ill, he should be cared for in this manner."

時尊者優波離復問世尊：「小德比丘病，當云何看視？」

Then Venerable Upāli further asked the World-Honored One: "If a junior monk is ill, how should he be cared for?"

佛告優波離：「小德比丘病者，不應著顯現處臭穢熏外，不得著屏猥處，死時人不知，應安人中。

The Buddha told Upāli: "A junior monk who is ill should not be placed in an exposed area with unpleasant odors, nor in a hidden place where, if he dies, no one would know; he should be among people.

若病人有和上、阿闍梨、若共行弟子、依止弟子應看。

If the patient has a preceptor or teacher, or accompanying disciples or dependents, they should care for him.

若無者，眾僧應差看病人，若一、二、三人看。

If not, the community should appoint one or two or three people to care for the patient.

若病人衣鉢外有醫藥直者，應取還供給。若無者，眾僧應與。

If the patient has materials for medicine besides his robes and alms bowl, they should be used. If not, the community should provide them.

若僧無者，彼有重價衣鉢，應轉貿輕者供給病人。

If the community has none, and he has expensive robes or bowls, they should be exchanged for less costly ones to provide for the patient.

病人惜者，應白眾僧言：『大德僧！某甲病比丘不知無常，慳惜衣鉢，不肯貿易。』

If the patient is reluctant, inform the community: 'Venerable monks! A certain sick monk does not understand impermanence and is unwilling to part with his robes and bowl.'

白僧已，軟語說法使得開解，然後貿易。

Inform the community and use gentle words to make him understand, and then make the exchange.

若復無者，應乞與。若不能得者，應僧食中取好者與。

If nothing is available, he should be given alms. If that is not possible, he should be given the best from the community's food.

若復無者，看病人應持二鉢入聚落乞食，持好者與。

If still unavailable, caregivers should take two bowls into the village for alms, giving the better one to the patient.

優波離！是名看小德病比丘法。」

Upāli! This is the method for caring for an ill junior monk."




病人成就五法難看。何等五？

A patient is difficult to take care of by possessing five qualities. What are the five?

不能服隨病藥隨病食、不從看病人語、病增損不知、苦痛不能忍苦、懈怠無慧，是名五法病人難看。

They cannot take medicine and food according to their illness, do not follow caregivers’ advice, do not recognize the increase or decrease of their illness, cannot endure pain, and are lazy and lack wisdom. These are called the five qualities that make a patient difficult to care for.

病人成就五法易看。何等五？

A patient is easy to take care of by possessing five qualities. What are the five?

能服隨病藥隨病食、隨看病人語、人問知病增損、能忍苦痛、精進有慧，是名五法病人易看。

They can take medicine and food according to their illness, follow caregivers’ advice, can tell the increase or decrease of their illness when asked, can endure pain, and are diligent and wise. These are called the five qualities that make a patient easy to care for.

五法成就不能看病。何等五？

To possess five qualities that make one unable to care for a patient. What are the five?

多污不能出大小行器唾盂等、不能為病人索隨病藥隨病食、不能時時為病人隨順說法、有希望心惜自業，是名五法不能看病。

They are messy and cannot clean up bedpans and spit bowls, cannot seek suitable medicine and food for the patient, cannot impart appropriate teachings to the patient at times, and have a hopeful mind but are concerned about their own tasks. These are called the five qualities that make one unable to care for a patient.

五法成就能看病人，少污能出大小行器唾盂等、能為病人索隨病藥隨病食、能時時為病人隨順說法、無希望心不惜自業，是名五法能看病人。

To possess five qualities that make one able to care for a patient: being tidy and able to clean up bedpans and spit bowls, can seek suitable medicine and food for the patient, can impart appropriate teachings to the patient at times, and have no hopeful mind without concern about their own tasks. These are called the five qualities that make one able to care for a patient.




病人九法成就，命雖未盡而必橫死。
When a patient realizes nine detrimental methods, they will die prematurely even if their life is not yet exhausted.

何等九？
What are these nine?

一、知非饒益食貪食。
1. Knowing that overconsumption is harmful yet still overeating.

二、不知籌量。
2. Lack of the ability to assess properly.

三、內食未消而食。
3. Eating when the previous food has not yet been digested.

四、食未消而擿吐。
4. Forcing oneself to vomit when the food is not digested.

五、已消應出而強持。
5. Retaining what should be expelled after digestion.

六、食不隨病食。
6. Eating without consideration for the illness.

七、隨病食而不籌量。
7. Following a diet for illness without proper assessment.

八、懈怠。
8. Laziness.

九、無慧，是名九法成就而必橫死。
9. Lack of wisdom. These are called the nine detrimental methods leading to premature death.

復次成就九法終不橫死。
In contrast, realizing nine beneficial methods, one will not die prematurely.

何等九？
What are these nine?

一、知非饒益食便少食。
1. Knowing overconsumption is harmful and eating less.

二、善知籌量。
2. Having the ability to assess properly.

三、內食消已而食。
3. Eating after the previous food is digested.

四、不強吐。
4. Not forcing oneself to vomit.

五、不強持。
5. Not forcibly retaining what should be expelled.

六、不食不隨病食。
6. Not eating or following a diet unsuitable for the illness.

七、食隨病食食能籌量。
7. Following a diet for an illness with proper assessment.

八、不懈怠。
8. Diligence.

九有智慧，是名成就九法終不橫死。
9. Having wisdom. These are called the nine beneficial methods ensuring one does not die prematurely.




佛語優波離：「有三種病人。何等三？

The Buddha said to Upāli: "There are three types of patients. What are the three?

有病人得隨病藥隨病食，如法看病而死。

There are patients who receive appropriate medicine and food, receive proper care and still die.

或有病人不得隨病藥隨病食，如法看病而活。

There are patients who do not receive appropriate medicine and food, receive proper care and survive.

有病人得隨病藥隨病食，得如法看病人，病必差不得便死。

There are patients who receive appropriate medicine and food, receive proper care, and the illness gets cured but they do not die immediately.

優波離！病比丘中，有不得如法看便死、得如法看便活者，是故應好看，務令如法安隱，即為施命。

Upāli! Among the sick monks, there are those who die without proper care and those who live with proper care; therefore, they should be well cared for and made to feel safe and comfortable, as it is equivalent to giving them life.

是故看病得大功德，諸佛讚歎。」是名看病人法。

Thus, nursing the sick accrues great merit and is praised by all Buddhas." This is the method of caring for the sick.




藥法者，佛俱薩羅國遊行，爾時尊者舍利弗風動，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
Once during Buddha's travels in the Kusalavata country, the venerable Sariputra fell ill, and the monks reported this to the Blessed One.

佛問比丘：「宜須何藥？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "What medicine is needed?"

答言：「世尊！呵梨勒。」
They replied, "Blessed One! Haritaki."

佛言：「從今日聽病比丘服呵梨勒。」
The Buddha said, "From today, sick monks are allowed to take Haritaki."

佛告諸比丘：「待我還舍衛城時語我，當為諸弟子制藥法。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Inform me when I return to the city of Savatthi, and I will establish a medical code for the disciples."

佛還舍衛城，諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！當為諸弟子制藥法，今正是時。」
When the Buddha returned to Savatthi, the monks said to him, "Blessed One! It is time to establish a medical code for the disciples."

佛告諸比丘：「從今日後聽諸病比丘服藥。」
The Buddha told the monks, "From today onward, sick monks are allowed to take medicine."



藥法者，時根、非時根，如是莖、皮、葉、菓、漿。
The principles of medicinal practice involve timely and untimely roots, such as stems, bark, leaves, fruits, and juices.

時根者，蕪菁根、葱根、緊扠根、阿藍扶根、芋根、摩豆羅根、藕根，如是等與食合者，是名時根。
Timely roots include turnip roots, onion roots, kink roots, alum roots, taro roots, modola roots, and lotus roots, which are suitable for consumption and are called timely roots.

非時根者，婆吒根、蓽茇羅根、尼俱律根、佉提羅根、蘇揵闍根，如是比不與食合者，是名非時根。
Untimely roots include roots like batra roots, bhibhara roots, ngylug roots, kathira roots, and such, which are not suitable for consumption and are called untimely roots.

莖、皮、葉、華、果亦如是。
The same principle applies to stems, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruits.

漿者，時漿、非時漿。
For juices, there are timely and untimely juices.

時漿者，一切米汁、饙汁、乳酪漿，是名時漿。
Timely juices include all rice juice, cooked rice juice, and cheese juice, known as timely juices.

非時漿者，一切豆、一切穀、一切麥漬頭不坼、蘇、油、蜜、石蜜，是名非時漿。
Untimely juices include all beans, all grains, all malted wheat without cracked heads, ghee, oil, honey, and rock honey, known as untimely juices.

若比丘病，醫言：「與食便活，不與便死。」者，應淨洗器七遍淘穀，緻囊盛繫已，器中煮令頭不破，然後與飲。
If a monk is sick and the doctor says: "Give him food, and he will live; don't feed him, and he will die," the grains should be washed seven times, boiled in a fine bag without breaking the head, and then given to drink.

一切地亦時亦非時，除八種灰，餘一切灰亦時亦非時，是名藥法。
All earth is timely and untimely, except for eight types of ash; all other ashes are also timely and untimely, which is known as medicinal practice.




梨、共行弟子、依止弟子法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
For those with teachers, mentors, fellow practitioners, and dependent disciples, the Buddha stayed in Shravasti, elaborating as above.

爾時有一歲比丘，將無歲弟子，兩肩上各有衣囊頭上戴，一左手捉鉢及革屣，右手提澡瓶及盛油革囊，共詣佛所頭面作禮。
At that time, there was a one-year-old monk with a novice disciple, carrying clothing bags over both shoulders and on his head. In his left hand, he held a bowl and sandals; in his right hand, he carried a wash bottle and an oil bag, and together they went to pay respects to the Buddha.

頭上衣囊墮世尊膝上，世尊即自却已，知而故問：「是誰許？」
The bag on his head fell onto the Buddha's knee, and the Buddha immediately drew back, knowingly asked, "Whose is this?"

答言：「世尊！是我共住弟子。」
He replied, "World Honored One! This is my accompanying disciple."

「汝幾歲？」答言：「一歲。」
The Buddha asked, "How old are you?" He replied, "One year."

「弟子幾歲？」答言：「無歲。」
"And how old is your disciple?" He replied, "He has no years."

佛語比丘：「喻如溺人而復救溺，汝始一歲已畜無歲弟子。」
The Buddha said to the monk, "It's like a drowning person trying to save another drowning person. You are just one year old and already have a novice disciple."

佛告諸比丘：「不能自降伏欲降伏他人，無有是處。不能自調而欲調御他人，無有是處。不能自度而欲度人者，無有是處。自未解脫欲解脫餘人者，無有是處。」
The Buddha told the monks, "One who cannot subdue oneself but wishes to subdue others, there is no such position. One who cannot discipline oneself but wishes to discipline others, there is no such position. One who cannot save oneself but wishes to save others, there is no such position. One who is not yet liberated but wishes to liberate others, there is no such position."

佛語比丘：「已能自降伏降伏餘人，斯有是處；能自調御調御他人，斯有是處；已能自度兼度餘人，斯有是處；已自解脫解脫餘人，斯有是處。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "One who already has self-control and subdues others, there is such a position; one who disciplines oneself and disciplines others, there is such a position; one who has already saved oneself and saves others, there is such a position; one who is liberated and liberates others, there is such a position."

佛言：「從今日後不聽減十歲比丘度人出家受具足。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, monks under ten years old are not permitted to ordain others into monkhood." 




，不聽未滿十歲度人出家受具足。  
Furthermore, the Buddha made a rule not to allow anyone under ten years old to be ordained and receive full ordination.

爾時難陀、優波難陀滿十歲，度人出家受具足已不教誡，如天牛、天羊戴標蕩逸，無制御者，清淨不具足、威儀不具足，不知承事和上、阿闍梨，不知承順長老比丘，不知入聚落法，不知阿練若法，不知入眾法，不知著衣持鉢法。  
At that time, Nanda and Upananda, when reaching ten years old, were ordained and received full ordination but were not taught properly. They were like heavenly oxen and sheep with their markings wandering aimlessly without guidance, lacking purity and decorum. They did not know how to serve their preceptors or teachers, how to respect elder monks, the rules for entering a village, the forest dwelling practices, the community's procedures, or how to wear robes and carry their alms bowl.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。  
The monks, because of this reason, reported to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日有十法成就，聽度人出家受具足。何等十？  
The Buddha said, "From today, there are ten achievements that allow one to be ordained and receive full ordination. What are the ten?

一、持戒。  
First, keeping precepts.

二、多聞阿毘曇。  
Second, being well-versed in Abhidharma.

三、多聞毘尼。  
Third, being well-versed in Vinaya.

四、學戒。  
Fourth, learning the precepts.

五、學定。  
Fifth, learning meditation.

六、學慧。  
Sixth, learning wisdom.

七、能出罪能使人出罪。  
Seventh, being able to confess offenses and help others do so.

八、能看病能使人看。  
Eighth, being able to care for the sick and help others do likewise.

九、弟子有難能送脫難能使人送。  
Ninth, when a disciple encounters difficulties, being able to help them overcome and help others do the same.

十、滿十歲。  
Tenth, being ten years old.

是名十事聽度人出家受具足。  
These are the ten requirements to allow one to be ordained and receive full ordination.

下至滿十歲知二部律亦得。」  
Even those as young as ten years old who understand the two divisions of the Vinaya are also permitted."



衛城，廣說如上。

Further, the Buddha stayed in the city of Sravasti, explaining broadly as above.

爾時有比丘命終，有二共住弟子，感思憂惱共坐樹下，如商人失財。

At that time, a monk passed away, and his two fellow-disciples sat under a tree sorrowfully, like merchants who lost their wealth.

佛知而故問：「是何等比丘？」

The Buddha knew and asked on purpose, "What kind of monks are these?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks reported the circumstances in detail to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後聽請依止敬如和上。」

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, you are permitted to request guidance respectfully as from a senior monk."

請依止法者，應偏袒右肩胡跪接足，作如是言：「尊憶念！

Those who request guidance should uncover the right shoulder, kneel down, and hold the feet, saying thus: "Venerable, please remember me!

我某甲從尊乞求依止，尊為我作依止，我依止尊住。」

I, so-and-so, request guidance from the Venerable; may the Venerable become my guide, and I shall dwell under the guidance of the Venerable."

第二、第三亦如是說。

The second and third should speak in the same manner. 




復次有一歲比丘，受無歲比丘依止，乃至九歲比丘受八歲比丘依止。
Then there is a one-year-old monk, taking a zero-year-old monk as a dependence, until a nine-year-old monk takes an eight-year-old monk as a dependence.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
All the monks, through this reason, reported to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽減十歲受人依止。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, those under ten years old cannot take others as dependence."




時六群比丘滿十歲，受人依止已不教誡，如天牛、天羊，乃至不知著衣持鉢法。  
When the six groups of monks reached the age of ten, they accepted followers but did not provide guidance, like celestial oxen and sheep, not even knowing the way of wearing robes or holding alms bowls.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。  
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後成就十法聽受人依止。何等十？  
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, to complete the ten principles to accept followers. What are the ten?

持戒乃至滿十歲，是名十事得受依止。下至滿十歲知二部律亦得。」  
Observing the precepts until reaching ten years is called the ten qualifications to accept followers. Even knowing the two Vinayas before reaching ten years suffices."

欲請依止時，不得趣請。  
When wishing to request dependence, you must not rush into the request.

有五法成就然後得請。何等五？  
There are five achievements before making the request. What are the five?

一、愛念。二、恭敬。三、慚。四、愧。五、樂住，是名五法應請依止。   
1. Affection. 2. Respect. 3. Shame. 4. Regret. 5. Pleasure in residence. These are the five principles for requesting dependence.

阿闍梨有四。何等四？  
There are four types of preceptors. What are the four?

一、依止師。二、受法師。三、戒師。四、空靜處教師。  
1. Teacher of dependence. 2. Teacher of receiving the Dharma. 3. Precepts teacher. 4. Teacher of secluded and serene places.

復有四種阿闍梨。何等四？  
There are also four types of preceptors. What are the four?

有阿闍梨不問而去、有阿闍梨須問而去、有阿闍梨苦住盡壽應隨、有阿闍梨樂住雖遣盡壽不離。  
There are preceptors who leave without being asked, preceptors who must be asked before leaving, preceptors who stay and endure hardship for life, and preceptors who stay joyfully and should not part for life.

不問而去者，有師依止住，無衣食病瘦湯藥，復不能說出家修梵行無上沙門果法，如是師不問而去。  
For those who leave without being asked, there is a teacher who provides dependence, yet lacks clothing, food, medicine, and does not explain the supreme path of the monastic life. Such a teacher leaves without being asked.

問而去者，有阿闍梨依止而住，雖有衣食病瘦湯藥，而不能說出家修梵行無上沙門果法，如是師須問而去。  
For those who must be asked before leaving, there is a preceptor who resides in dependence, and although having clothing, food, and medicine, cannot explain the supreme path of the monastic life. Such a preceptor must be asked before leaving.

苦住者，有阿闍梨依止而住，雖無衣食病瘦湯藥，善說出家修梵行無上沙門果法，如是阿闍梨共住雖苦盡壽不應去。  
For those who stay in hardship, there is a preceptor who resides in dependence and, although lacking clothing, food, and medicine, skillfully explains the supreme path of the monastic life. Such a preceptor should not be left even if life remains difficult.

有樂住者，有阿闍梨依止而住，能與衣食病瘦湯藥，善說出家修梵行無上沙門果法，如是阿闍梨雖驅遣，盡壽不應去。  
For those who stay joyfully, there is a preceptor who resides in dependence and provides clothing, food, and medicine, skillfully explaining the supreme path of the monastic life. Such a preceptor, even if dismissed, should not be left for life.

是名四。復有四種。何等四？  
These are the four types. There are also four kinds. What are the four?

受法依止調伏貪欲瞋恚愚癡，是中能為弟子善說法除貪欲瞋恚愚癡，如是阿闍梨最上最勝，喻如從乳得酪、從酪得酥、從酥得醍醐，醍醐最上最勝。  
Teaching the Dharma to subdue greed, hatred, and ignorance, among which a disciple can be taught well to eliminate greed, hatred, and ignorance, such a preceptor is the highest and most distinguished, akin to obtaining curd from milk, butter from curd, and ghee from butter, with ghee being the best and most superior.




和上、阿闍梨應教共住弟子、依止弟子。

The preceptor and the teacher should teach the disciples living together, and dependent disciples.

教法者，不淨應遮，非行處、被羯磨，惡邪見自解使人解，自出罪使人出罪，病自看使人看，難起若自送若使人送、王賊。

For the teachings, impurities should be avoided. Things like improper conduct, censure, evil wrong views—one should comprehend these oneself and help others comprehend as well. One should extricate oneself from sins and help others extricate themselves too. In case of illness, self-care should be prioritized, and one should aid others too. Difficulties should be overcome, whether self-consigned or with assistance from others—the king or bandits.




不淨應遮者，若弟子犯小小戒、別眾食、處處食、女人同屋、未受具足人過三宿、截生草、不淨菓食，應教言：「莫作是。」

Impurities should be prevented: If a disciple violates minor precepts, eats in isolation, eats everywhere, shares a room with a woman, stays more than three nights without full ordination, cuts living grass, or eats impure fruit, one should instruct them saying, "Do not do this."

若言：「和上、阿闍梨！我更不作。」者善。

If they say, "Teacher, advisor! I will not do it again," that is good.

若言：「和上、阿闍梨但自教，教他為？」若如是者，應語知床褥人奪床褥、知食人斷食。

If they say, "Teacher, advisor, only teach yourself, why teach others?" If this is the case, one should tell those in charge of bedding to take away the bedding, or those in charge of food to cut off the food.

若前人凶惡，依王力大臣力能作不饒益者，若是和上應避去，若是依止阿闍梨，應擔衣鉢出界一宿還，即離依止。

If the person is wicked and relies on the power of the king or powerful ministers to do harm, if he is the teacher, he should leave; if he is the advisor, he should carry his robe and bowl, spend one night outside, and then return, thus breaking dependence.

共住弟子、依止弟子作不淨行，和上、阿闍梨不教者，越毘尼罪。

If co-residing disciples or dependent disciples commit impure actions and the teacher or advisor does not instruct them, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名不淨應遮。

This is called "impurities that should be prevented."




非行處者，大童女家、寡婦家、摴蒱家、酤酒家、惡名比丘尼、惡名沙彌尼，在是諸處往反者，和上、阿闍梨應教：「莫此處來往，是非可習近處。」

Prohibited places are homes of young maidens, widows, gamblers, wine sellers, nuns of ill-repute, and novices of ill-repute. The preceptor or teacher should instruct those frequenting these places: "Do not frequent these places; they are unsuitable for association."

若受者善，乃至出界一宿還，即名離依止。

If the recipient is virtuous and leaves the boundary for a night and returns, it is called leaving reliance.

共住弟子、依止弟子在非行處往反，若不教者，越毘尼罪。

For disciples living together or relying on each other, frequenting prohibited places without instruction results in a Vinaya transgression.

是名非行處。

This is called a prohibited place.




若作折伏羯磨。

Should one be subject to the determination, if the Sangha performs the penance ritual,

不语羯磨、发喜羯磨、摈出羯磨，

The silence ritual, the joy-inducing ritual, or the expulsion ritual,

於三见中若一一见：谤线经、恶邪见、边见，

Among the three views, if one exhibits any of them: disparaging the scriptures, wrong views, or extreme views,

谏不舍作举羯磨。

advises against letting go of the ritual transgression.

和尚、阿阇梨应为弟子悔谢诸人：

The preceptor or teacher should apologize to everyone on the disciple's behalf:

「诸长老！此本恶见，今已舍，行随顺法。」

"Elders! This originally wrong view has now been relinquished, and they follow the Dharma.

凡夫愚痴何能无过？

How can ordinary foolish people be without fault?

此小儿晚学，实有此过，

This young novice, indeed, has this fault,

从今日当教敕，更不复作。」

From today onwards, he should be taught and instructed, not to do it again."

悦众意已，求僧为解羯磨。

Once the assembly is pleased, request the Sangha to revoke the ritual.

共住弟子、依止弟子，僧作羯磨不为解者，

Joint resident disciples or dependent disciples, if the Sangha performs the ritual and it isn't revoked,

越毘尼罪。

it is a transgression of the monastic code.

是名被羯磨。

This is called being subject to the ritual. 




惡邪見起自解使人解者，

If a wrong view arises and leads oneself or others to liberation,

若弟子起惡邪見、若謗線經、若惡邪見、若邊見，

If a disciple develops a wrong or slanderous view of the teachings, or holds a wrong, extreme view,

和上、阿闍梨應教：「莫起此見，此是惡事，墮惡道、入泥犁，長夜受苦。」

the teacher or preceptor should instruct them: "Do not hold such views, this is wrong conduct, leading to a bad path, descending into hell, where one suffers for a long time."

如是種種為說，捨者善；若不捨者，應語彼知識，如是言：「長老為彼說，令捨惡見。」

Thus, it is good to persuade them to abandon it; if they do not abandon it, inform a knowledgeable person, saying: "Elder, please explain to them, making them abandon the wrong view."

若不自解、不使人解，越毘尼罪。

If one does not liberate oneself or help others to liberation, it violates the Vinaya precepts.

是名惡見自解使人解。

This is called liberating oneself and others from wrong views.



自出罪使人出者，若弟子犯可治罪，若犯僧伽婆尸沙，覆藏者，應自與波利婆沙。
If one commits an offense that can be remediated, such as a Sangha offense or concealing it, they should resolve it themselves or with the help of the community.

若不覆藏者，應與摩那埵。
If it is not concealed, they should be given a probationary penance.

乃至越毘尼罪，應自治，若不能者使人治。
For violations of the monastic code, they should rectify it themselves; if they cannot, they should seek help.

若共住弟子、依止弟子犯罪，師不自與出、不使人與出，越毘尼罪。
If a residential disciple or dependent disciple commits an offense, and the preceptor neither resolves nor facilitates its resolution, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名自出罪使人出罪。
This is called resolving one's own offenses or helping others to resolve their offenses.




病自看使人看者，若弟子病，應自看、使人看，

To care for the sick is to attend to them personally or have others do so; if a disciple falls ill, one should care personally or have others care.

不得使人看、己自不經營，一日應三往看，

One should not delegate care without involvement, and should visit three times a day.

語看病人：「汝莫疲厭，展轉相看，佛所讚歎。」

Tell the sick, "Do not be weary or discouraged, mutually caring for each other is praised by the Buddha."

若共住弟子、依止弟子病，師不看者，越毘尼罪。

If a teacher does not care for a sick disciple who lives with them or depends on them, it constitutes a transgression of the Vinaya.

是名病自看使人看。

This is called personally caring for the sick or having others care.



難起若自送若使人送者，若弟子親里欲罷其道，師應教遠避，

If it is difficult to go on your own or have someone send on your behalf, and the disciple or relative wants to give up this path, the teacher should instruct to stay away.

成就出家功德應自送，若老病若知僧事應囑人送，

To accomplish the merit of renouncing the world, one should go on their own; if old or sick, or aware of Sangha matters, one should entrust someone to send on their behalf.

若不自送、不使人送，越毘尼罪。

If one does not go on their own or does not have someone send on their behalf, it is a breach of Vinaya rules.

是名難起若自送若使人送。

This is known as the difficulty of going on your own or having someone send on your behalf.



王賊者，若弟子為王收錄，師不應便逐去，應在外伺候消息。
In case of a king's criminal act, if a disciple is taken by the king, the teacher should not leave immediately but should wait outside for news.

若王家問：「誰是和上、阿闍梨？」爾時應入。
If the king's family asks, "Who is the master or teacher?" one should then enter.

若事枉橫，應求知識證明。
If there is any injustice, one should seek knowledgeable people for evidence.

若須財物追逐，應與衣鉢，若無者應乞求與。
If it is necessary to provide money or goods, one should give what they can; if they have nothing, they should request assistance.

若弟子為賊抄賣遠在他方者，師應推求追贖。
If a disciple is sold far away by thieves, the teacher should try to redeem them.

若弟子王賊所捉，和上、阿闍梨不救贖者，越毘尼罪。
If a disciple is captured by the king or thieves and the master or teacher does not attempt to rescue them, it is a violation of the Vinaya rules.




闍梨，共住弟子、依止弟子亦應如是諫，不得麁語如教誡法，應軟語諫和上、阿闍梨：「不應作是事。」
If living with a master or teacher, a disciple should likewise admonish them gently and not rudely as per instructional rules, and should softly advise the master or teacher, "You should not do this."

若言：「子！我更不作。」若爾者善。
If they say, "Disciple, I will not do it again." Then that is good.

若言：「止！止！汝非我和上、阿闍梨，我當教汝，汝更教我？如逆捋竹節。汝莫更說。」
If they say, "Stop! Stop! You are not my master or teacher; I am to teach you, and yet you teach me? It's like rubbing bamboo nodes in reverse. Don't say this again."

若是和上者，應捨遠去。
If this is the master, you should leave and go far away.

若依止阿闍梨，應持衣鉢出界一宿還，依止餘人。
If it is the teacher you rely on, you should take your robes and alms bowl, leave the boundary for a night, and return to rely on another person.

若師有力勢應遠去；若不去，應依止有德重人。
If the master has power, you should go far away; if not, you should rely on a person of virtue and repute.

若非行處應諫，若被羯磨應料理，若起惡見當自解、倩人解，自出罪、倩人出罪，病不病應供給，若師有難應送去，若王賊捉應追救。
If it is not a proper place you should advise; if caught up in a communal decision, you should manage it; if wrongful views arise, you should self-explain or ask another to explain, confess or have others confess for you, provide care whether sick or not, escort if the master is in difficulty, and rescue if caught by the king or robbers.

若共住弟子、依止弟子，師犯小小戒不諫，乃至王賊捉不追救者，越毘尼罪。
If a cohabiting or relying disciple does not admonish the master when committing minor precepts, or does not rescue when caught by king or robbers, they violate monastic rules.



共住弟子、依止弟子於和上、阿闍梨邊，應行是事：
Fellow practitioners and disciples should perform these duties in the presence of their teacher and preceptor:

起迎、報語，
Rise to greet and respond to speech,

作是事、自作與他作，
Perform these actions, both personally and for others,

衣鉢事，
Matters concerning robes and bowls,

自剃與他剃，
Shaving oneself and assisting others in shaving,

刀治、與取、
Handling and receiving knives,

受經授他、與欲取欲，
Accepting texts and transmitting them to others, and exchanging permissions,

服藥、迎食與他迎食，
Taking medicine, receiving food and helping others to receive food,

離境界、大施、不問去。
Leaving the boundaries, major offerings, and not inquiring about departures.



起迎者，弟子遙見和上、阿闍梨，應起迎。
When the disciple sees the eminent monk and teacher from afar, they should rise to greet them.

若食五正食，若受一食法，不得起者應低頭。
If one has eaten the five proper foods, or observes the practice of eating once, and is unable to rise, they should lower their head.

若受一食法時應白師，
When one follows the practice of eating once a day, they should inform the teacher,

師應問：「汝堪一食不？」堪者應受。
The teacher should ask: "Can you manage eating once?" If they can, they should follow it.

若言：「不堪。」應語：「莫受。」
If they say: "I cannot," they should be told: "Do not accept it."

若弟子見師不起者，越毘尼罪。
If the disciple does not rise when seeing the teacher, it is a Vinaya offense.

是名不起迎。
This is called failing to rise and greet.



報語者，和上、阿闍梨共語，弟子應報，
When speaking to an elder or a teacher, the disciple should respond.

若口中有食，能使聲不異者應報。
If the mouth is full of food but one can speak without changing the sound, one should respond.

若不能者，待咽已然後報。
If unable, one should wait until the food is swallowed and then respond.

師言：「何故聞我語不報？」
The teacher might ask, "Why didn't you respond when you heard me speak?"

應語言：「弟子口中有食。」
One should reply, "I had food in my mouth."

若師語不報者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not respond to the teacher's words, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名報語。
This is called responding in speech.




作事者，和上、阿闍梨語弟子作是事，如法應作。
Those who take action, when the abbot or teacher instructs the disciple to do such a thing, it should be done according to the law.

若言：「喚彼女來、取酒來。」
If someone says, "Call her here, bring wine here."

應軟語言：「我聞如是等非法事不應作。」
It should be gently said, "I have heard that such unlawful acts should not be done."

師若語作如法事，不作者越毘尼罪。
If the teacher instructs to do lawful actions, not doing so is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名作事。
This is called taking action.




自作與他作者，若欲有所作，應問：「我欲共某甲作是事。」
When creating together with others, if you want to do something, you should ask, "I want to do this with a certain person."

師應觀相，前人若不善持戒者，應語：「莫與從事。」
The teacher should observe appearances, and if the person before them is not good at observing precepts, they should say, "Do not engage with them."

若是善持戒者，應語共作。
If they are good at observing precepts, they should say to work together.

若次到作維那直月，應白師，如威儀中廣說，是名自作與他作。
When it is the turn to serve as the supervisor for a month, they should report to the teacher, as elaborated in the etiquette, which is called self-creation and co-creation.



。

This is called the task of handling clothes and bowls.

衣鉢事者，若欲熏鉢，若取巨磨泥爐及熏時，一一應白。

Regarding the task of clothes and bowls, if you wish to smudge the bowl, whether taking a mortar or clay stove for smudging, each step should be reported.

若不能一一白者，但言：「我欲作熏鉢事。」一白通了。

If unable to report each step, simply say, "I wish to perform the task of smudging the bowl." This single report suffices.

熏鉢時應問和上、阿闍梨：「鉢欲熏不？」

When smudging the bowl, you should ask the teacher or instructor, "Do you want to smudge the bowl?"

若言：「熏。」應問：「為先熏、後熏？為一處熏？」

If they say, "Smudge," ask, "Should I smudge first or later? Or smudge all at one place?"

若言：「一處。」應問：「著上、著下？」隨師教應作。

If they say, "All at one place," ask, "Top or bottom?" Follow the teacher's instruction to proceed.

若欲染衣時應白，若浣時、縫時、煮染時一一應白。

If wishing to dye clothes, report each step, whether washing, sewing, or boiling for dyeing.

若不能者但言：「我欲作染衣事。」一白通了。

If unable to report each step, simply say, "I wish to perform the task of dyeing clothes." This single report suffices.

染衣時應先問和上、阿闍梨：「衣欲染不？」

When dyeing clothes, you should first ask the teacher or instructor, "Is the cloth to be dyed?"

若言：「染。」者，應問：「欲前染、後染、為一時？」

If they say, "Dye," then ask, "Should I dye first or later, or simultaneously?"

若言：「一時。」應先染和上、阿闍梨衣。

If they say, "Simultaneously," first dye the clothes of the teacher and instructor.

如是縫時、染時、舉時，不得持師衣裹己衣，應持己衣裹師衣。

Similarly, when sewing, dyeing, or lifting, do not wrap your own clothes in the teacher's clothes; rather, wrap the teacher's clothes in your own.

作衣鉢事不白師，越毘尼罪。

Doing the task of clothes and bowls without reporting to the teacher results in violation of the Vinaya.

是名衣鉢事。

This is called the task of handling clothes and bowls.




者，自欲剃髮時應白師，師應問：「誰與汝剃？」
When wanting to shave oneself, one should inform the teacher, and the teacher should ask, "Who will shave you?"

答言：「某甲。」「某甲知剃不？」
Answer, "Someone." "Does someone know how to shave?"

答言：「此是眼見事。」師言：「不可。」
Answer, "This is apparent." The teacher says, "Not allowed."

若言：「知！」師應觀前人，不善持戒，亦言：「不可。」
If he says, "Yes!" the teacher should observe the former person, and if they do not uphold the precepts well, still say, "Not allowed."

若善持戒，應言：「剃。」
If they uphold the precepts well, he should say, "Shave."

若欲與他剃髮者，應白師：「我與某甲比丘剃髮。」
If one wants to shave another, they should tell the teacher, "I am shaving another monk."

師應問：「汝能不？」答言：「此是眼見事，何故不能？」
The teacher should ask, "Can you?" Answer, "This is apparent, why not?"

應語：「不可。」若言：「我能。」
Should be told, "Not allowed." If he says, "I can,"

應相前人，若不善持戒者，應言：「不可。」
He should assess the previous person, and if they do not uphold precepts well, say, "Not allowed."

若善持戒者，應言：「好用意。」
If they uphold precepts well, say, "Take care."

若和上、阿闍梨入聚落，後剃髮人來欲令剃髮者，應白餘長老比丘：
If the preceptor or mentor enters a village, and someone comes wanting to have their hair shaved, they should tell remaining elder monks:

「我欲剃髮。」師還應白師。
"I want to shave." The teacher should again inform the teacher.

師行後得剃髮人剃髮，是名自剃與他剃。
After the teacher's actions, if the shaving person shaves, this is called shaving oneself and others


刀治者，欲與他破瘡時應白師：「與某甲比丘破瘡。」
When a blade healer wants to treat another's sore, they should inform the teacher: "I'm treating a sore for a certain bhikkhu."

師應問：「汝能不？」
The teacher should ask: "Can you do it?"

答言：「此眼見事，何故不能？」
If answered: "This is a matter seen by the eye, why can't I do it?"

師言：「不可。」
The teacher says: "You cannot."

若言：「能。」
If one says: "I can."

師應相前人，若不善持戒者，應語：「不可。」
The teacher should inspect the person, and if they do not keep the precepts well, should say: "You cannot."

若善持戒者，應問：「何處病？」
If they do keep the precepts well, the teacher should ask: "Where is the ailment?"

若言：「猥處。」者，應語：「離穀道邊各四指莫觸。」
If they say: "The private parts," they should be told: "Stay four fingers away from the grain path on both sides."

若刺頭出血、若除處癰痤等應作。
If blood comes out or if removing pus, it should be done accordingly.

若自欲破瘡時應白師，師應問：「在何處？」
If one wants to treat their own sore, they should inform the teacher, and the teacher should ask: "Where is it?"

若言：「在猥處。」者，應語：「不可。」
If one says: "On the private parts," they should be told: "You cannot."

若在餘處如上說，是名刀治。
If it's elsewhere, proceed as previously stated; this is called knife treatment.




欲与他物时应白师。

If the receiver wants to give something to someone, they should inform their teacher.

师应问：「与谁？」

The teacher should ask, "To whom?"

若言：「与寡妇、童女、婬女、樗蒱、凶恶人、恶名比丘尼、恶名沙弥尼、不持戒比丘。」

If they say, "To a widow, a young girl, a licentious woman, a gambler, a wicked person, a notorious nun, a notorious novice nun, or a monk who does not uphold precepts."

应语：「不应与此人等相习近。」

They should be told, "You should not associate closely with such people."

若父母不信三宝者， 应少经理。

If the parents do not believe in the Three Jewels, one should manage less.

若有信心者，得自恣与无乏。

If they have faith, they can freely give without deficiency.

若欲取他物时应白师。

If one wants to take something from others, they should inform their teacher.

师应问：「谁与汝？」

The teacher should ask, "Who is giving it to you?"

若言：「大童女乃至不善持戒比丘与我。」

If they say, "A young girl or even a monk who does not uphold precepts is giving it to me."

应语：「莫与此人等相习近。」

They should be told, "Do not associate closely with such people."

若言：「善持戒者。」

If they say, "A person who upholds precepts well."

应语：「取。」

They should be told, "Take it."

问：「齐几许得不白与取？」

Ask, "To what extent can one take without informing?"

半条线、半食，是名不白与取。

Half a portion or half a meal—this is called taking without informing.



與他迎食自迎食者，若他倩迎食時應白師：「與某甲比丘迎食。」

If someone is receiving alms for others and while receiving it on someone else's behalf, he should inform the teacher, "Receiving alms for a certain monk."

師應問：「彼比丘何故不去？」

The teacher should ask, "Why is that monk not going himself?"

答言：「彼間食苦，此間食樂。」

Reply, "He finds it painful to get alms there, and it's easy here."

應語：「若求樂者莫為請。」

He should say, "If he is seeking comfort, do not make the request."

若為維那、若病人請者，當相望其人，不善持戒者應言：「不可。」

If it's for a steward or a sick person, then consider the person; if they are not holding precepts well, you should say, "No."

若言：「當次與迎。」應語：「取彼鉢淨洗，合自鉢持去。」

If they say, "Then give it to him to receive," then say, "Take the bowl, clean it, and bring your own."

若言：「彼善持戒。」者，應言：「與迎。」

If they say, "He upholds precepts well," then say, "Receive it for him."

若欲請人迎食者應白師，師應問：「汝何故不去？」

If you want to request someone to receive alms, you should inform the teacher, who should ask, "Why are you not going?"

答言：「彼間食苦，此間食樂。」應語：「汝為樂故不可。」

Reply, "It's painful to get alms there, easy here." He should say, "It's not allowed just for comfort."

若作維那、若病，應問：「使誰迎？」答言：「某甲。」

If acting as steward or sick, you should ask, "Who will be the receiver?" Reply, "A certain person."

若彼不善持戒，應言：「不可。」

If he does not uphold precepts well, you should say, "Not allowed."

若言：「彼次應與我迎食。」應語：「更請餘人。」

If he says, "He is suitable to receive alms for me," you should say, "Invite another person."

若同和上、阿闍梨、若善持戒者與迎，是名自迎食與他迎。

If the one receiving is with a preceptor, a teacher, or upholds precepts well, this is called receiving alms for oneself and for others.



受經授經者，若欲授他經時應白師，師應問：「授誰經？」

The one who receives a teaching, if they wish to teach others, should inform the teacher. The teacher should ask, "To whom are you teaching?"

答言：「與某甲比丘授經。」

To answer, "To such-and-such a monk I am teaching."

「授何經？」若言：「《沙路伽耶陀》。」

"What teaching are you giving?" If they say, "The 'Salugayata'."

應語：「不可，世尊所不聽。」

They should say, "No, this is not permitted by the Exalted One."

若言：「呪經。」應語：「可。」

If they say, "A charm scripture," they should say, "Okay."

應教彼：「莫以此活命。」

They should instruct them, "Do not use this to make a living."

若言：「《阿含》。」師應相彼人，不善持戒，應言：「不可。」

If they say, "The 'Agama'," the teacher should assess them. If they do not hold the precepts well, they should say, "Not allowed."

若善持戒者應語：「汝經利不？」

If they hold the precepts well, they should ask, "Do you profit from the teachings?"

答言：「不利。」

They respond, "No profit."

他邊問已：「當授？」應言：「不可。」

Others may ask, "Should you teach?" They should reply, "Not allowed."

若言：「利。」者，應語：「授。」

If they say, "Profit," they should say, "Teach."

若欲自受經時亦應白師，如上說，是名自受授他。

If one wishes to receive a teaching themselves, they should also inform the teacher as stated above. This is called self-receiving and teaching others.




與欲取欲者，若與欲取欲時應白師，如上迎食中廣說。
For those who desire attainment, if at the time of desiring attainment, one should inform the teacher, as elaborated above in the section on welcoming food.



服藥者，欲服藥時當先白師，若已坐欲先飲酥後食者，雖不白而服無罪。
For those taking medicine, when intending to take it, they should inform the teacher first. If already seated and wishing to drink ghee before eating, even if they haven't informed, there is no fault.



離境界者，出僧伽藍門過二十五肘應白而去，若經行、若坐禪，應白令知處所。
A person leaving the boundary should inform when passing twenty-five elbows beyond the sangha monastery gate, whether for walking meditation or seated meditation, they should inform to make their location known.

欲大小行時，若在師前應低頭設敬而去，不在師前不敬無罪。
When desiring to go for a walk, big or small, if in front of the teacher, they should bow their head respectfully when leaving; if not in front of the teacher, there is no offense in not showing respect.




若欲大施應白師言：「我一切所有盡欲布施。」

Those who wish to make a great offering should tell the teacher, "I want to give away all I have." 

師應語：「出家人要須三衣、鉢盂、尼師壇、漉水囊、革屣。」

The teacher should say, "A monk must have three robes, a bowl, a sitting mat, a water strainer, and shoes."

弟子言：「我除是外，一切盡欲布施。」

The disciple responds, "Besides these, I wish to give away everything else."

師應相望，若不善持戒、不受誦習行道，應言：「聽。」

The teacher should observe, and if the disciple is not virtuous, does not recite or practice the path, should say: "Proceed."

若善持戒，能受誦習行道，應語：「布施非是堅法，汝依是諸物以備湯藥，得坐禪誦經行道。」

If virtuous, capable of recitation and practice, the teacher should say: "Giving is not a steadfast practice; you should keep these items for medicine, meditation, chant scriptures, and practice the path."

若言：「我有親里自供給我衣食病瘦湯藥。」

If the disciple says: "My relatives provide me with clothes, food, medicine, and care when sick."

師應語：「若爾者聽。」是名大施。

The teacher should say, "If so, proceed." This is called a great offering. 




白去者，若欲行時應白和上、阿闍梨，不得臨行乃白，應先前一月半月豫白：「弟子欲至某方國土。」

If a monk wishes to leave, he should inform his preceptor or teacher in advance, not at the last minute. He should inform them a month or half a month in advance: "Disciple wishes to go to a certain region or country."

師應問：「何事故去？」

The teacher should ask, "Why are you leaving?"

若言：「此間僧作事苦、受經、誦經苦。」

If he says, "The monastic work here is arduous, and receiving and reciting the teachings is difficult."

和上、阿闍梨復言：「少食少飲多覺少眠。」

The preceptor or teacher should reply, "Eat and drink little, be more awake, and sleep less."

「彼間住樂。」

"Living there is joyful."

師應語：「汝為是故出家，何得辭苦？」

The teacher should say, "You became a monk for this reason; how can you resign due to hardship?"

若言：「和上、阿闍梨經營事務不授我經，是故欲去。」

If he says, "The preceptor and teacher manage affairs without teaching me the scriptures, that's why I want to leave."

若能授者，應語：「莫去。」

If they can teach him, they should say, "Do not go."

若不能者，眾中有善持戒誦利者，應語：「於彼授。」

If they cannot, they should say, "Among the assembly, find one who is good at holding precepts and reciting, and learn from them."

若復無者，彼間有知識多聞比丘應遙囑。

If none exist, one should find a knowledgeable and well-versed monk there and seek guidance.

若行時不白和上、依止阿闍梨而去者，越毘尼罪。

If a monk leaves without informing the preceptor or the teacher upon whom he depends, it is an offense against the Vinaya.

是中共住弟子、依止弟子，於和上、阿闍梨所應行是事。

For those disciples living together or dependent disciples, they should inform their preceptor or teacher of such matters.

是名白和上、阿闍梨而去。

This is called informing the preceptor or teacher before leaving.



摩訶僧祇律卷第二十八
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume 28




