orry, but I need the text you would like to have translated. Could you please provide the lines you want translated into Chinese


【經文資訊】

[Scripture Information]

大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊

Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo Volume 22

No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律

No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




版本記錄

Version History

發行日期

Release Date

2024-08

2024-08

最後更新

Last Updated

2024-07-12

2024-07-12




#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

#【Editing Explanation】This database is edited by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taishō Tripiṭaka".




蕭鎮國大德提供，

Provided by the virtuous master Hsiao Tzen-Kuo,

伽耶山基金會提供，

Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation,

北美某大德提供，

Provided by a certain virtuous master in North America,

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

New punctuation provided by Master Shih Ben-Chan.



【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Matters] This database is freely available for distribution; for more details, please refer to the 【Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database】.




orry, I need the text that you want translated to proceed. Could you please provide it


佛陀因地悲志，現種種相，降豎皆屈。菩薩從彼因陀羅，出世度生無數。

The Buddha, with a compassionate resolve, manifested numerous forms, subduing all opponents. From Indra, the Bodhisattva emerged, liberating countless beings.

摩竭陀國王，聞風來請。更接應詔，佛陀不遲行。

The king of Magadha, upon hearing the news, invited him. Responding to the summons, the Buddha did not delay in his journey.

於諸洛陽，名聲遠振。日行百里，更無勞倦。

In Luoyang and beyond, his fame spread extensively. Traveling a hundred li a day, he never grew tired.

發十二願，利益無窮。若至彼國，皆得解脫。

He made twelve vows with boundless benefit. Whosoever reaches that land will attain liberation.

何者之義，哀愍眾生。文殊廣宣，行願饒益。

What is the meaning, compassionate towards all beings. Manjushri expounds broadly, vows of actions full of benefit.

彼時天帝，遙聞此事。稽首歸命，良久不息。

At that time, the deity in heaven, hearing of this from afar, bowed in homage, long in ceaseless reverence.



不與取者，奪其物，波羅夷。

Taking what is not given, stealing leads to Parajika.

犯戒者，蓄意犯戒，波羅夷。

A transgression committed intentionally leads to Parajika.

行非梵行，淫欲之事，波羅夷。

Engaging in non-celibate actions, acts of lust lead to Parajika.

偽稱擁有超常能力，波羅夷。

Falsely claiming extraordinary abilities leads to Parajika.




，時毘舍離有一病比丘，嬰患經久治不時差。
At the time, the Buddha resided in Vaishali, where there was a sick monk who had been ill for a long time and was not recovering.

看病比丘心生疲厭，便語病比丘言：「長老！我看病久，不得奉侍和上、阿闍梨，亦不得受經誦經、思惟行道。
The monk attending to the sick became weary and said to the sick monk, "Elder, I've been caring for you for a long time and have not been able to serve the senior monks or receive and recite the teachings."

長老疾病既久治不可差，我亦疲苦。」
"Elder, your illness has been long and incurable, and I am also exhausted."

病比丘言：「當奈之何？我亦患厭苦痛難忍，汝若能殺我者善。」
The sick monk replied, "What can be done? I am also mired in unbearable pain. If you can kill me, it would be good."

是比丘即便殺之。 
The attending monk then killed him.

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣具白世尊，佛言：「呼彼比丘來。」
Upon hearing this, the other monks reported the matter to the Buddha, who said, "Call that monk here."

來已，佛廣問上事：「比丘！汝實作是事不？」
When he came, the Buddha comprehensively inquired, "Monk, did you indeed do this?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, "Indeed, World-Honored One."

佛言：「癡人！汝常不聞我無量方便稱讚於梵行人所，身行慈、口行慈、意行慈，供養供給所須。
The Buddha said, "Foolish man! Have you not heard me extolling those who lead a pure life through countless means, practicing bodily, verbal, and mental kindness, and providing support and necessities?"

汝今云何手自斷人命根？此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是事長養善法。」
"How can you now personally end a life? This is against the Dharma, against the rules, and not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings. Such actions do not nurture good deeds."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told all the monks, "Assemble all the monks staying in Vaishali. For the ten benefits, I establish precepts for the monks, so that those who have heard may hear again."

若比丘手自斷人命根，是比丘波羅夷，不應共住。」
"If a monk personally ends a life, that monk incurs a Parajika offense and shall not dwell among the community."



舍離，時有一病比丘，得患經久治不能差。  
Furthermore, when the Buddha was residing in Vesali, there was a sick monk who had been ill for a long time and could not be cured.

看病比丘心生疲厭，便語病比丘言：「長老我看病來久，不得奉事和上、阿闍梨，不得受經誦經、思惟行道。  
The monk who was taking care of him became weary and said to the sick monk, "Elder, I have been caring for you for a long time and have been unable to attend to the senior monks, receive teachings, recite scriptures, or contemplate the path.

長老疾病既久治不可差。我亦疲苦。」  
Your illness has been treated for long without improvement. I am also weary."

病比丘言：「當奈之何？我亦患此苦痛難忍，汝若能殺我者善。」  
The sick monk said, "What can be done? I am also suffering from this unbearable pain. If you can kill me, that would be good."

是比丘言：「世尊制戒不得自手殺人。」  
The monk replied, "The Blessed One has ordained that we must not kill with our own hands."

病比丘言：「汝若不能自手殺我者，汝可為我求持刀者來。」  
The sick monk said, "If you cannot kill me yourself, you can find someone to bring a knife for me."

是時看病比丘便往鹿杖外道所語言：「長壽！汝能殺某比丘者，當與汝衣鉢。」  
The attending monk then went to an outsider known for using a deer staff and said, "Long life! If you can kill a certain monk, I can give you robes and a bowl."

彼便如語殺之，取其衣鉢。  
He did as instructed, killed him, and took the robes and bowl.

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣具白世尊，佛言：「呼看病比丘來。」  
The monks heard about it and reported the incident to the Blessed One, who said, "Summon the attending monk."

來已，佛問看病比丘：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實爾。」  
Upon arrival, the Buddha asked the attending monk, "Did you really do this?" He replied, "Indeed."

佛言：「癡人！汝常不聞我無量方便稱讚於梵行人所，身行慈、口行慈、意行慈，供養供給所須。  
The Buddha said, "Foolish man! Have you not frequently heard me extol the virtues of the life of chastity, acting with kindness of body, speech, and mind, and offering necessary support?

汝今云何求持刀者斷人命根？此非法、非律、非是佛教，不可以是事長養善法。」  
Why did you seek someone to cut off a person's life? This is not lawful, not according to the rules, not the Buddha's teaching, and it cannot cultivate good qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "Have all the monks in Vesali gather. For the sake of ten advantages, I will establish a precept for the monks, and those who have heard it should hear it again.

若比丘自手斷人命，求持刀者令奪人命，是比丘得波羅夷，不應共住。」  
If a monk takes a life with his own hands or seeks someone to take a life, that monk has committed a parajika and should not stay with the community."  



舍離，時有長病比丘、有看病比丘，乃至語長病比丘言：「我不得受經誦經、思惟行道，又復從人求索隨病飲食、湯藥，人皆厭我，我亦疲苦。」
Again, the Buddha was residing in Vesali, at that time there was a long-sick monk and a monk who attended the sick. The sick monk said, "I am unable to receive or recite the scriptures, contemplate the path, nor ask others for meals or medicinal substances due to this illness. Everyone is tired of me, and I am also weary and in pain."

病比丘言：「當如之何？我亦患此苦痛難忍，汝能殺我者善。」
The sick monk said, "What should I do? I too am suffering unbearably from this pain. It would be good if you could kill me."

是比丘言：「汝不聞世尊制戒，不得手自殺人耶？」
The monk said, "Haven't you heard the precepts set by the World Honored One, which state that one should not personally kill others?"

病比丘言：「若爾者，汝為我呼持刀者來。」
The sick monk said, "If so, can you call someone to bring a knife for me?"

比丘復言：「汝不聞世尊制戒，不得求持刀者令殺人耶？」
The monk replied again, "Haven't you heard the precepts set by the World Honored One, which state that one should not seek someone with a knife to kill?"

病比丘言：「今當奈何？」
The sick monk asked, "What should be done now?"

看病比丘言：「汝但自求活、不欲死，若欲死者汝自有刀，可用自殺、亦可飲毒、用繩自勠、投坑赴火、抱石沈淵，自殺之法亦甚眾多。」
The monk attending the sick said, "You should seek to live, not wish to die. If you wish to die, you have a knife to kill yourself, or you can drink poison, use a rope to hang yourself, throw yourself into a pit of fire, or sink into a deep pool with stones. There are many ways to end your life."

作是讚說已，乃避出外。
After saying these words of praise, he then went outside.

時病比丘於後自殺。
The sick monk later committed suicide.

諸比丘以是事具白世尊，佛言：「呼彼看病比丘來。」
The monks reported this matter to the World Honored One, and the Buddha said, "Call the monk who attended the sick to come."

來已，佛廣問上事：「汝實爾不？」
After he came, the Buddha asked extensively about the prior matter, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛言：「汝常不聞我無量方便稱讚於梵行人所，身行慈、口行慈、意行慈，供養供給所須耶？」
The Buddha said, "Have you not constantly heard me, through countless skillful means, praise those who practice chastity, act with kindness in body, speech, and mind, and provide for the needs of others?"

汝今云何譽死歎死？此非法、非律、非如佛教。不可以是事長養善法。」
How can you now praise and commend death? This is not in accordance with the Dharma, the Vinaya, or the teachings of the Buddha. Such actions do not foster the growth of wholesome qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all the monks dwelling in Vesali, and for the benefit of the ten advantages, I declare a precept for the monks. Even those who have heard before should hear again.

若比丘自手斷人命，求持刀與殺者，教死、譽死，是比丘得波羅夷，不應共住。」
If a monk were to personally take a life, seek others to bring a knife to kill, instruct in death, or praise death, that monk commits a parajika offense and should not reside with the community.


復次佛住毘舍離，廣說如上。

Furthermore, the Buddha stayed at Vaishali and elaborated as above.

時鹿杖外道殺比丘已，甚大憂惱作是念言：

At that time, a non-Buddhist ascetic named Deer Cane, having killed a monk, was deeply troubled and thought:

「我今云何斷梵行人命作是惡法？

"How could I have ended the life of a noble one following the holy path and committed such an evil deed?

我命終後將無墮惡道入泥犁中。」

Will I fall into a bad realm or hell when my life ends?"

爾時天魔波旬常作方便增長諸惡，

At that time, Mara, the evil one, always devised means to increase all evils,

便於空中語外道言：

and from the sky he spoke to the non-Buddhist ascetic:

「汝莫愁惱畏墮惡道。

"Do not worry or fear falling into a bad realm.

所以者何？汝今所作脫人苦患，未度者度，功德無量。」

Why? Because what you have done frees people from suffering, helping the undelivered to cross over, with immeasurable merit."

時彼外道即作是念：

At that time, the non-Buddhist ascetic then thought:

「我殺比丘乃獲大福，能使諸天隨喜讚善。」

"If I kill monks, I will gain great blessings and please the gods who will praise the virtue."

作是念已，後持利刀至僧房中及經行處，

With this thought, he later took a sharp knife to the monks' quarters and places of practice,

處處唱令語諸比丘：

proclaiming everywhere to the monks:

「誰欲離苦？

"Who wants to leave suffering?

誰求度者？

Who seeks to be liberated?

我能脫苦能令得度。」

I can free you from suffering and help you attain liberation."

爾時世尊為諸比丘說不淨觀，

At that time, the World-Honored One taught the monks the meditation of impurity,

時諸比丘修不淨觀患厭身苦，

and when the monks practiced the meditation of impurity, they became weary and afflicted by their bodies,

中有以繩自勠、飲服毒藥、

among them some hanged themselves, some drank poison,

以刀自害、投坑赴火、自殺者眾。

some used knives to harm themselves, some jumped into pits or into fires, many committed suicide.

又為鹿杖外道前後所殺者，非是一人、二人，三、四、五人，十人乃至六十人。

Moreover, those killed before and after by the non-Buddhist ascetic with the Deer Cane were not just one or two, but three, four, five, ten, up to sixty people.

爾時世尊月十五日坐於僧中，前後圍遶欲作布薩。

At that time, on the fifteenth day of the month, the World-Honored One sat among the monks, surrounded in front and behind, intending to perform the Posadha ceremony.

世尊左右觀察見眾僧少，

The World-Honored One looked around and saw the assembly of monks was small,

問阿難言：

and asked Ananda:

「今比丘僧何以故希，何以不見某甲比丘等？」

"Why is the assembly of monks so sparse today? Why do I not see such-and-such monks?"

阿難白佛言：

Ananda respectfully replied to the Buddha:

「世尊先為諸比丘說不淨觀，讚歎修習不淨觀功德。

"World-Honored One, you previously spoke to the monks about the meditation on impurity and praised its merits.

是諸比丘勤修不淨觀，修不淨觀已極厭患身，

The monks diligently practiced the meditation on impurity and became extremely weary of their bodies,

或有以刀自殺，

and some killed themselves with knives,

乃至使鹿杖外道斷其命者，

even to the extent that the non-Buddhist ascetic with the Deer Cane ended their lives,

半月之中乃至六十人，

and within half a month, up to sixty died,

諸不來者皆悉命過。

and all those who do not come have passed away.

唯願世尊更開餘法，

I only wish for the World-Honored One to teach another method,

不令諸比丘厭身自殺，

so that the monks do not grow weary of their bodies and commit suicide,

令諸賢聖久存於世利益天人。」

allowing the virtuous and holy ones to remain in the world for a long time to benefit gods and humans."

於是佛告阿難：

Thereupon, the Buddha told Ananda:

「更有三昧，使諸比丘快樂善學不極厭身。

"There is another samadhi that can make the monks joyful and learn well without becoming weary of their bodies.

何等三昧快樂善學不極厭身？

What is this samadhi that makes one joyful and well-learned without becoming weary of the body?

所謂阿那般那念。

It is called mindfulness of breathing (Anapanasati).

阿難！云何比丘修阿那般那念，作證成就遊安樂住？

Ananda, how does a monk practice mindfulness of breathing, realizing and achieving, to dwell in comfort and ease?

若比丘依止城邑聚落住，

If a monk resides near a city or village,

時到著衣持鉢入城乞食，

at the appropriate time he dresses and takes his bowl into the city for alms,

攝身口意善住身念，

keeping his body, speech, and mind restrained and well-grounded in mindfulness of the body,

心不馳亂常行正受，

and his mind does not run wild and he constantly maintains true attention,

攝持諸根入城乞食。

controlling his senses while entering the city for alms.

乞食已還至彼寂靜處安坐，

After begging for alms, he returns to a quiet place and sits calmly,

謂於空地、山㵎、巖窟、塚間，敷草正坐。

such as an open area, a forest, a cave, or a charnel ground, and spreads grass to sit correctly.

除諸貪欲、瞋恚、睡眠、掉悔、疑蓋、滅諸障礙，

He removes all desire, ill will, drowsiness, restlessness, worry, doubt, and dispels all obstacles,

心慧力明繫心在息，

and with a bright and powerful mind, focuses on the breath,

息入時知息入、

knowing when the breath enters,

息出時知息出、

knowing when the breath exits,

息入長時知息入長、

knowing the breath is long when it is long entering,

息出長時知息出長、

knowing the breath is long when it is long exiting,

息入短時知息入短、

knowing the breath is short when it is short entering,

息出短時知息出短、

knowing the breath is short when it is short exiting,

息入遍身時知息入遍身、

knowing when the breath spreads throughout the body entering,

出息遍身時知出息遍身、

knowing when the breath spreads throughout the body exiting,

入息身行捨時知入息身行捨、

knowing when the tranquilization of bodily activities occurs with the breath entering,

出息身行捨時知出息身行捨、

knowing when the tranquilization of bodily activities occurs with the breath exiting,

入息喜時知入息喜、

knowing when joy arises with the breath entering,

出息喜時知出息喜、

knowing when joy arises with the breath exiting,

入息樂時知入息樂、

knowing when happiness arises with the breath entering,

出息樂時知出息樂、

knowing when happiness arises with the breath exiting,

入息意行時知入息意行、

knowing when mental activities occur with the breath entering,

出息意行時知出息意行、

knowing when mental activities occur with the breath exiting,

入息意行捨時知入息意行捨、

knowing when the tranquilization of mental activities occurs with the breath entering,

出息意行捨時知出息意行捨、

knowing when the tranquilization of mental activities occurs with the breath exiting,

入息知心時知入息知心、

knowing when the mind is aware with the breath entering,

出息知心時知出息知心、

knowing when the mind is aware with the breath exiting,

入息心悅時知入息心悅、

knowing when the heart rejoices with the breath entering,

出息心悅時知出息心悅、

knowing when the heart rejoices with the breath exiting,

入息心定時知入息心定、

knowing when the mind is concentrated with the breath entering,

出息心定時知出息心定、

knowing when the mind is concentrated with the breath exiting,

入息心解脫時知入息心解脫、

knowing when the mind is liberated with the breath entering,

出息心解脫時知出息心解脫、

knowing when the mind is liberated with the breath exiting,

入息無常時知入息無常、

knowing impermanence with the breath entering,

出息無常時知出息無常、

knowing impermanence with the breath exiting,

入息斷時知入息斷、

knowing cessation with the breath entering,

出息斷時知出息斷、

knowing cessation with the breath exiting,

入息無欲時知入息無欲、

knowing dispassion with the breath entering,

出息無欲時知出息無欲、

knowing dispassion with the breath exiting,

入息滅時知入息滅、

knowing disappearance with the breath entering,

出息滅時知出息滅。

knowing disappearance with the breath exiting.

如是阿難！作是念者，

In this way, Ananda, one who practices this mindfulness,

名為快樂善學不極厭身，

is called joyful, well-learned and not weary of the body,

令諸賢聖久住於世利益天人。」

allowing the virtuous and holy ones to remain in the world for a long time to benefit gods and humans."

佛告諸比丘：

The Buddha told the monks:

「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，

"All the monks residing in Vaishali should be assembled,

以十利故為諸比丘制戒，

and for their ten benefits, I will establish precepts for the monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。

even those who have already heard should listen again.

若比丘自手奪人命，

If a monk takes life with his own hand,

求持刀與殺者，教死、歎死：

or seeks to hold a knife and kill, or instructs or praises death saying:

『咄男子！用惡活為？死勝生。』

'Oh man! Why live in evil? Death is better than life.'

如是意、如是想，

With such an intention, with such thinking,

方便歎譽死、快令彼死，

if one praises death intentionally and facilitates death happily,

非餘者，是比丘波羅夷，不應共住。」

is no other than a parajika (defeated) and should not live in communion."




比丘者，乃至年滿二十受具足，是名比丘。
A Bhikkhu, when reaching the age of twenty, receives full ordination, and is called a Bhikkhu.




自手者，自身、身分、身勢力。
By one's own hand, it means oneself, one's body parts, and bodily force.

自身者，全身堆壓殺人，波羅夷，是名自身也。
It means when one uses their entire body to pile on and kill someone, it is called oneself.

身分者，若手、若肘、若脚、若膝，及餘身分殺人者，波羅夷，是名身分。
Body parts mean using hands, elbows, legs, knees, or other body parts to kill someone, it is called body parts.

身勢力者，若杖、若石、若塼，遙擲殺人，波羅夷，是名身勢力。
Bodily force means using a stick, stone, or brick to throw and kill someone from a distance, it is called bodily force.




人者，有命人趣所攝。
A human being is bound by destiny to various realms.




奪命者，令彼命根不相續、四大分散，是名奪命。
The taker of life causes the continuum of life-force to be interrupted, and the elements to disperse—this is called 'taking life.'



求者，求持刀人，若男女、大小、在家、出家。

Seekers search for a person with a knife, regardless of gender, age, whether at home or as a monastic.




刀者，若劍戟、長刀、短刀、鉾矟、鐵輪，一切利器乃至鍼等。
The word "sword" encompasses weapons such as spears, long swords, short swords, halberds, iron wheels, and all sharp instruments including needles.




歎死者，言：「用惡活為？死則勝生。」
Lamenting the dead, saying: "Why endure a miserable life? Death is better than life."

如是意者殺意也，如是想者殺想也。
Such thoughts are thoughts of killing, such ideas are ideas of killing.




歎譽死快者，令彼人死。
Those who praise death swiftly cause others to die.




非余者

Not others

因是死

Because of this, death

是比丘波羅夷

Is a Bhikkhu Parajika

不應共住

Should not live together




波羅夷者，為於法智退沒墮落，無道果分，
Parajika refers to losing and falling away from the wisdom of the law, devoid of the path and fruition.

如是乃至盡智、無生智，於此諸智退沒墮落，無道果分，是名波羅夷。
This includes the ultimate wisdom and non-birth wisdom; falling away from these wisdoms without the path and fruition is called Parajika.

又復波羅夷者，於泥洹退沒墮落，無證果分，是名波羅夷。
Additionally, Parajika refers to falling away from Nirvana, without achieving fruition, which is called Parajika.

又復波羅夷者，離於不殺退沒墮落，是名波羅夷。
Furthermore, Parajika involves straying away from the vow of not killing, which is called Parajika.

又復波羅夷者，所可犯罪不可發露悔過，是名波羅夷。
Finally, Parajika includes committing offenses that cannot be revealed for repentance, which is called Parajika.




比丘殺人者，若用刀殺、若毒殺、若塗殺、若吐殺、若下殺、若墮胎殺、若說相殺、歎譽殺。

A monk who kills a person, whether with a knife, with poison, with a coating, through vomiting, downhill, by causing a miscarriage, by describing as such, or by praising the killing.




刀者，若劍、大小刀乃至鍼等。
Blades refer to items such as swords, large and small knives, and even needles.

殺心，身動時，得越比尼罪；
With the intent to kill, when moving the body, it incurs the transgression of an offense.

觸彼身時，偷蘭罪；
When it touches the body, it is an offense deserving of punishment.

因是死非餘者，波羅夷。
If this causes death and not other means, it is a grave offense.

是名刀殺。
This is called killing with a blade.




毒藥殺者，有三種藥：有生毒藥、有作毒藥、有蠱毒藥。
There are three types of poisons used for killing: natural poison, fabricated poison, and witchcraft poison.

生毒藥者，有國土地生毒藥，如倪樓國生勝渠毒藥、欝闍尼國生伽羅毒藥，是名生毒藥。
Natural poison refers to poisons that occur naturally in certain regions, like the victorious channel poison from the Nilou country or the Karura poison from the Yuzhuni country; these are called natural poisons.

作毒藥者，如獵師作毒藥，根莖花葉合和為藥，是名作毒藥。
Fabricated poison refers to those made by combining roots, stems, flowers, and leaves, like hunters do; these are called fabricated poisons.

蠱毒藥者，若蛇毒、那俱羅毒、猫子毒、鼠毒、狗毒、羆毒、人毒，如是種種毒，是名蠱毒。
Witchcraft poison refers to various kinds of poisons such as snake poison, Nakura poison, cat poison, rat poison, dog poison, bear poison, or human poison; these are called witchcraft poisons.

若比丘以殺人心，取此三種藥，得越比尼罪；
If a monk, with the intent to kill, takes any of these three types of poisons, he incurs the offense of violating the precepts.

到彼身，偷蘭罪；
Upon making contact with their body, it is the thullaccaya offense.

若因是藥死者，波羅夷。
If someone dies because of this poison, it is a parajika offense.

是名毒藥殺。
This is called murder with poison.




塗藥殺者，若比丘欲殺人故，手捉毒藥時，得越比尼罪；
For the poisoning murderer, if a monk, with the intent to kill a person, takes hold of poison, he incurs a minor offense;

塗彼身分，得偷蘭罪；
Applying it to a part of their body, he commits a grave offense;

彼因是死，波羅夷。
If the person dies from this, it is a major offense resulting in expulsion.

是名塗藥殺。
This is called killing by poisoning.



吐殺者，若比丘欲殺人故，合吐藥，作是念：
The one who kills by vomiting, if a monk wants to kill someone and mixes an emetic, thinks:

「我持是藥與彼，當令吐膿血內藏。」得越比尼罪；
"I will give him this medicine, and it will make him vomit pus and blood from within." He commits an offense of wrongdoing;

與彼藥，得偷蘭罪；
Giving him the medicine, he commits a grave offense;

彼因是藥吐死，波羅夷。
If he dies from vomiting because of this medicine, it is a Parajika offense.




下藥者，比丘欲殺人故，作下藥時作是念：「持是藥與彼，令下膿血及下內藏。」
Administering poison is done by a monk with the intention to kill, and when preparing the poison, he thinks: "Give this medicine to him to cause him to expel pus, blood, and internal organs."

得越比尼罪；若與彼藥，得偷蘭罪；若因是下藥死者，得波羅夷。
This incurs the offense of being expelled from the community; if he gives the medicine, he incurs a grave offense; if the person dies from the poison, he incurs a parajika (major offense).

是名下藥殺。
This is called "killing with poison."




墮胎殺者，若比丘欲殺母人而胎墮者，得越比尼罪；
In the case of abortion, if a monk intends to kill a mother and the fetus is aborted, he incurs a grave offense;

欲墮胎而母死者，得越比尼罪；
If intending to abort the fetus and the mother dies, he incurs a grave offense;

欲殺母，母死者，得波羅夷；
If intending to kill the mother and the mother dies, he commits a Parajika offense;

欲墮胎，胎分乃至身根命根墮者，波羅夷。
If intending to abort the fetus and the body's primary life-supporting elements are expelled, he commits a Parajika offense.

若人壞畜生胎墮者，得越比尼罪。
If a person causes a miscarriage of an animal fetus, he incurs a grave offense.

是名為墮胎殺。
This is called the act of causing abortion.




說相者，若比丘語人言：「我今所見汝必定死，便可自殺，用是苦活為？」

Fortune telling involves a monk saying to someone, "I see that you will certainly die, so you might as well kill yourself; why continue this painful life?"

是人因是死者，是比丘得波羅夷。

If the person dies because of this, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

又復言：「如我夢所見，汝今定死。」

Furthermore, he says, "As I saw in my dream, you will certainly die."

又復言：「我聞野干土梟烏鵲鳴，我今見汝面色鼻曲，汝將定死。便可自殺，用苦活為？」

He also says, "I heard the howling of jackals and the cries of owls and magpies. Seeing your complexion and curved nose, you will certainly die. You might as well kill yourself; why suffer living?"

是人因是死者，是比丘得波羅夷。

If the person dies because of this, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

又復問言：「汝幾歲？」答言：「我爾許歲。」

He further asks, "How old are you?" and the reply is, "I am such and such years old."

又言：「我解一切性命，汝今年必死，汝不如自殺，用惡活為？」

He adds, "I understand all fates. You will die this year. You might as well kill yourself; why live miserably?"

因是死者，是比丘得波羅夷。

If because of this the person dies, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

又復言：「汝屬何星？」答言：「我屬某星。」

He also asks, "What star sign are you under?" The reply is, "I am under a certain star sign."

便言：「我知彼星，當知汝今必死無疑。何不自殺，用苦活為？」

He then says, "I know this star, and you will certainly die without a doubt. Why not kill yourself; why endure suffering?"

是人因是死，是比丘得波羅夷。

If because of this the person dies, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

又復問言：「汝名何等？」答言：「我名某甲。」

He further inquires, "What is your name?" He answers, "My name is so and so."

復言：「我解一切名字，汝必定死。」

He continues, "I understand all names, and you will certainly die."

復問：「汝何姓？」答言：「我姓某。」

He asks again, "What is your surname?" The reply, "My surname is such and such."

復言：「我解一切名姓，汝今必死。」

He then says, "I understand all surnames, and you will certainly die."

復問：「汝何所食？」答言：「食如是食。」

He further questions, "What do you eat?" The answer, "I eat such food."

便教令吐，吐已語言：「汝食此食，必死無疑。」

He then instructs to vomit, and after vomiting, he says: "Eating this food, you will undoubtedly die."

復問：「汝何處食？」答言：「某處食。」

He inquires again, "Where did you eat?" The reply, "I ate at such a place."

復教令吐，吐已語言：「某處有毒，汝今必死。何不自殺，用苦活為？」

He further instructs to vomit, and after vomiting, he says: "That place is poisonous; you will surely die. Why not kill yourself; why live painfully?"

是人因是死，是比丘得波羅夷。

If because of this the person dies, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

若比丘欲殺人故說相，得越比尼罪；彼作方便欲自殺，得偷蘭罪；若自殺已，得波羅夷。

If a monk makes a prediction in order to kill, he gets a transgression of Vinaya offense; if it causes the other to try to kill themselves, the monk incurs a Thullaccaya offense; if self-killing occurs, the monk incurs a Parajika offense.

是名說相殺。

This is called prediction-induced killing.



歎譽殺者，施戒果施者，比丘問言：「汝布施不？」
A monk praised the one who kills, the one who gives as a karmic result of observing precepts, asking: "Do you give alms?"

答言：「布施。」
The reply was: "I give alms."

比丘言：「汝已作功德必生善處。何不自殺，用苦活為？」
The monk said: "You have created merit and will surely be reborn in a good place. Why not kill yourself, why endure this suffering life?"

是名施戒者。
This refers to the one who observes precepts.

比丘問人：「汝持戒不？」
A monk asks someone: "Do you observe precepts?"

答言：「持戒。」
The reply was: "I observe precepts."

「世尊說持戒生二處：若天上、若人中，用是苦活為？」
"The Blessed One said observing precepts leads to two places: either heaven or human realm, why endure this suffering life?"

是名讚持戒果者。
This refers to someone who praises the karmic results of observing precepts.

比丘言：「汝已得須陀洹果不墮惡趣，極至七反天人往來，便盡苦邊閉惡趣門。何不自殺，用苦活為？」
A monk said: "You have attained Stream-entry fruit, not fallen into woeful states, and will at most seven times return as a god or human, thus ending suffering and closing the gates of woeful states. Why not kill yourself, why endure this suffering life?"

又言：「汝已得斯陀含，一來世間便盡苦邊。何不自殺，用苦活為？」
Further he said: "You have attained Once-returner status, after one more rebirth, you will end suffering. Why not kill yourself, why endure this suffering life?"

復言：「汝已得阿那含，不還世間便盡苦邊。何不自殺，用苦活為？」
Further he said: "You have attained Non-returner status, without returning to this world, you will end suffering. Why not kill yourself, why endure this suffering life?"

復言：「汝已得阿羅漢，婬怒癡盡，不隨煩惱心得自在。何不自殺，用苦活為？」
Further he said: "You have attained Arhantship, with lust, anger, and ignorance ended, not following defilements and with a free mind. Why not kill yourself, why endure this suffering life?"

若比丘欲殺人故，讚歎施戒果者，得越比尼罪；
If a monk, intending to kill a person, praises almsgiving and the results of precepts, he commits a serious offense.

彼方便欲自殺時，得偷蘭罪；
If he, in due preparation, wants to kill himself, he incurs a minor offense.

若自殺已，波羅夷。
If he kills himself, it is a disciplinary offense leading to expulsion.



若行
If you walk

若獨廢
If you are solitary and abandoned

若毘陀羅呪
If you invoke the incantation of Vidhura

若屑藥
If you use crumbled medicine

若烏滿吐
If a crow spits fully

若坑陷
If there is a pitfall

若阿波欽滿
If Apakinna is fulfilled

若示道
If a way is shown

若河
If the river

若大臣
If the minister

若僧坊
If the monastery

若虎
If the tiger

若外道
If the heretic or outsider




人、若二十人共隨道行，

Travelers, whether ten or twenty people following the path together,

比丘先有怨嫌，欲害前人誤害中人，得越比尼罪；

If a monk has prior resentment and intends to harm the person ahead but mistakenly harms the middle person, he incurs a grave offense;

欲害中人誤害後人，得越比尼罪；

If he intends to harm the middle person but mistakenly harms the person behind, he incurs a grave offense;

欲害後人誤害中人，得越比尼罪；

If he intends to harm the person behind but mistakenly harms the middle person, he incurs a grave offense;

欲害中人誤害前人，得越比尼罪；

If he intends to harm the middle person but mistakenly harms the person ahead, he incurs a grave offense;

欲害前人害前人者，波羅夷；

If he intends to harm the person ahead and does so, it is a parajika offense;

欲害中後人害中後人者，波羅夷。

If he intends to harm the middle or the back person and does so, it is a parajika offense.

若都一切有殺心者，隨所害人，得波羅夷。

If there is a deliberate intent to kill anyone, depending on whom he harms, he incurs a parajika offense.

是名行殺。

This is called deliberate killing.



獨廢殺者，若比丘有殺心，
Solitary murder is when a monk has intention to kill,

作獨廢，若於道中安施獨廢時，得越比尼罪；
he arranges a solitary setting, if he places anything solitary on the path, he incurs an infringement of monastic rules;

彼受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；
when the person experiences pain, he incurs a minor offense;

若彼死者，得波羅夷。
if that person dies, he incurs a grave offense.

是名獨廢殺。
This is called solitary murder.




毘陀羅呪者，
Vitara incantation user,

若比丘欲殺人故，
If a monk intends to kill someone,

作毘陀羅呪，
He makes a Vitara incantation,

害心作呪時，
When he makes the incantation with harmful intent,

得越比尼罪；
He commits a transgression against the nun's code;

令彼生恐怖時，
When it causes the other to feel terror,

得偷蘭罪；
He commits a grave offense;

彼死者得波羅夷。
If the person dies, he commits a parajika.

是名毘陀羅呪殺。
This is called a Vitara incantation killing.




屑藥殺者，若比丘欲殺人故，作末屑藥時作是念：「持是藥當殺彼人。」者，得越比尼罪；
When a monk, intending to kill a person, thinks while making powdered medicine: "I will use this medicine to kill that person," he incurs a transgression of the minor precept;

若藥著彼身者，得偷蘭罪；
If the medicine is applied to that person's body, it is a thullaccaya offense;

若彼死者，波羅夷。
If that person dies, it is a parājika offense.

是名屑藥殺。
This is called killing with powdered medicine.




烏滿吐者，若比丘欲殺人故，
The act of using poison, when a monk intends to kill someone,

於道中作烏滿吐，
and administers the poison along the path,

若比丘殺心作時，得越比尼罪；
if the monk acts with the intention to kill, he commits an offense of transgression.

彼受苦痛得，偷蘭罪；
If the person suffers pain, the monk incurs an offense of thievishness.

若死者，波羅夷。
If the person dies, it is a heinous offense.

是名烏滿吐殺。
This is called killing by poison.



坑陷殺者，若比丘欲殺人故，當道中作坑安種種利槍，以草土覆上令彼墮死，

Trapping and killing: if a monk intends to kill a person, he digs a pit in the path and sets sharp weapons, covering them with grass and soil to cause the person to fall and die.

殺心作時，得越比尼罪；

When the intention to kill is formed, he commits the pārājika offense.

若受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；

If causing injury, he commits the thullaccaya offense.

若死者，波羅夷。

If the person dies, it is a pārājika offense.

是名坑陷殺。

This is called trapping and killing.




阿波欽滿殺者，若比丘欲殺人故，於道中安施阿波欽滿，比丘殺心作時，得越比尼罪；
Abhashinmankiller means, if a monk intends to kill a person, places an abhashinman on the road, and when the monk's mind intends to kill, he commits the transgression of vinnaya-skipping;

若受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；
If the person suffers pain, he commits the offense of steal-rice;

若死者，得波羅夷。
If the person dies, he commits a parajika offense.

是名阿波欽滿殺。
This is called abhashinmankilling.




示道殺者，若比丘在道邊經行，有人來問比丘言：「長老！我欲至某聚落，道在何處？」
Guiding someone to their death means if a monk is walking by the roadside, and someone comes and asks the monk, "Elder! I want to go to a certain village, where is the road?"

比丘先與彼人有怨嫌，便作是念：「我今得是人便，當示惡道令死，使無一活。」
The monk holds a grudge against that person and thinks, "Now I have a chance with this person, I should show them a dangerous path to get them killed, so that not one will survive."

便指示惡道，若王難、若師子、虎狼難、若毒螫難，
Then he indicates a dangerous path, perhaps with the danger of robbers, lions, tigers and wolves, or poisonous insects.

示是等惡道時，得越比尼罪；若受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；若死者，波羅夷。
When showing such a dangerous path, if the person gets into difficulty, it's a minor transgression; if they suffer pain, it's a deliberate wrongdoing; if they die, it's a serious transgression.

是名示道殺。
This is called guiding someone to their death.




河殺者，若比丘在河邊經行，有人來問言：「長老！我欲至某處，應從何處渡？」
The river killer is when a monk is walking by the river, and someone comes to ask: "Elder! I want to go somewhere, where should I cross?"

是比丘於彼人先有怨嫌，便作是念：「我今得是人便，示此非濟處，勿令一人得脫。」
The monk has a grudge against that person and thinks: "I can take advantage of this person, show him a non-crossing place, and not let him escape."

便示非濟處，若洄澓處、伏石機激尸收摩羅等處，若上彼岸處，有王禁難、有賊難、有師子虎狼毒虫等難，
He then shows a non-crossing place, like a whirlpool, hidden rocks, or rapid currents, or across the bank with difficulties like a king's prohibition, bandits, lions, tigers, wolves, or poisonous insects.

示彼非濟處時，得越比尼罪；若受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；若死者，波羅夷。
When he shows them the non-crossing place, he commits the Prātimokṣa offense; if the person suffers pain, he commits a lesser offense; if they die, it's a Pārājika offense.

是名河殺。
This is called "river killing."




大臣者，若有大臣暴虐無道，貪取人物用自供給，不畏罪罰，恣意放逸作是念言：「寧作今日烏，不作明日孔雀。」

If a minister is tyrannical and lawless, greedily taking things for personal use without fear of punishment, and indulges in thinking, "I'd rather be a crow today than a peacock tomorrow."

王聞是已，攝錄囚繫責之以罪；彼畏死故，一切資財用持贖命。

When the king hears this, he captures and imprisons them to hold them accountable for their crimes; in fear of death, they use all their possessions to ransom their lives.

爾時有比丘出入其家，便往慰勞，問其家苦樂。

At that time, a monk visiting their home comforts them and asks about their family's happiness or suffering.

其婦答言：「家主有事繫閉在獄，何得有樂？阿闍梨當知，今我家主恐罪至死，故一切資財盡持贖命，錢財若盡便當貧窮無由自活。」

The wife responds, "The head of the household is involved in something and is imprisoned. How can there be happiness? Reverend, you should know that my husband fears death due to his crimes, so he uses all our assets to ransom his life. If all our money is gone, we will be impoverished and unable to survive."

比丘言：「汝莫愁悒，我當語汝夫不令用財。」便至獄上慰勞言：「無病。長壽！」

The monk says, "Do not worry, I will speak to your husband so that he won’t use your wealth." He then goes to the prison to comfort him and says, "Be without illness. Live long!"

大臣見比丘來心大歡喜言：「阿闍梨！外何所聞？」

The minister, seeing the monk come, feels great joy and says, "Reverend! What news is there from outside?"

比丘答言：「聞汝當死，欲盡持家財自用贖命。若如是者，汝後妻子當遭貧困飢寒乞匃，又汝家門戶惡名流布。」

The monk replies, "I hear you are facing death and want to use all your wealth to ransom your life. If this happens, your wife and children will suffer from poverty, hunger, and cold, begging for survival, and your family's reputation will be tarnished."

大臣答言：「當如之何？」

The minister asks, "What should I do?"

比丘言：「是王無道，設使盡輸汝財，會不相活，慎莫與物。但當任其裁量。」

The monk says, "The king is unjust. Even if you give all your wealth, you may not survive; be cautious and do not give anything away. Let things take their course."

若彼大臣然可其語時，是比丘得越比尼罪；若受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；若死者，波羅夷。

If the minister believes his words, the monk commits a minor offense; if the minister suffers, a mid-level offense; if the minister dies, a major offense.

若大臣聞彼比丘語，答言：「阿闍梨是我知識，而惜錢財不用活我。我死之後，假使日月不出非我所憂，況復餘事！阿闍梨還去，思惟佛語吉凶好惡，無豫尊事。」爾時得越比尼罪。

If the minister hears the monk's words and responds, "Reverend is like a friend, but he is begrudging wealth and not saving me. After I die, even if the sun and moon do not rise, it is not my concern, let alone other matters! Reverend, go back, reflect on the Buddha’s words on fortune and misfortune, and do not dwell on worldly matters," the monk commits a minor offense.

大臣尋即思惟：「如比丘語，是王無道，設盡與財會必殺我。我既唐死，妻子飢寒無由自活，門戶恥辱痛甚於死。我今身自當之，不與財物。」

The minister then thinks, "As the monk said, the king is indeed unjust. If I give all my wealth, he will surely kill me. If I die, my wife and children will not survive the cold and hunger and will face shame worse than death. I will take responsibility myself and will not give away any wealth."

以不即用比丘語故，是人死者，是比丘以先教方便故，得偷蘭罪。

Because the minister did not immediately act on the monk's advice and subsequently died, the monk commits a mid-level offense for initially advising the means.

有人犯王法，有伺捕得縛送與王，王教將去隨罪治之。

Someone breaks the king's law, and when they are caught, they are bound and brought to the king, who orders them to be punished according to their crime.

時典刑者以伽毘羅花莊嚴罪人頭，反縛兩手打鼓吹貝周匝唱令。

The executioner adorns the criminal's head with Kabila flowers, binds their hands behind their back, beats drums, and blows conch shells as they are paraded around.

唱令已，將出城門向刑罪人處。

After this proclamation, they are taken out of the city gate to the place of punishment.

時有摩訶羅比丘不善知戒相，愍此罪人苦痛，語典刑者言：「此人可愍，莫使苦痛，汝持刀為作一瘡。」

At that time, there is a monk named Mahaara who is not well-versed in the precepts. With pity for the sufferings of the criminal, he tells the executioner, "This person is pitiable, do not cause them pain, just make one cut with your knife."

爾時魁膾答言：「如教。」便持利刀，為作一瘡。

The executioner replies, "As you instruct." He then takes a sharp knife and makes one cut.

是摩訶羅比丘，得波羅夷。

This monk Mahaara commits a major offense.

若魁膾答比丘言：「汝用知是為？如王教令我自行之，汝且還去思惟佛語。」爾時得越比尼罪。

If the executioner responds to the monk, saying, "Why would you know about this? I must act according to the king's orders; you should return and think about the Buddha's teachings," the monk would commit a minor offense.

魁膾尋便思惟：「用比丘語為作一瘡。」以不即用比丘語故，是摩訶羅比丘得偷蘭罪。

The executioner then reflects, "Should I follow the monk's words and make one cut?" Because he did not immediately follow the monk's instructions, the monk Mahaara commits a mid-level offense.

是名大臣。

This is known as the minister.



僧坊者，有客比丘來，應次受房舍。
In a monastery, when a visiting monk arrives, he should be given accommodations in order.

時知房舍比丘與客比丘先有嫌，便作是念：「我今得子便，當與破房，令其必死。」
The monk in charge of the accommodations, knowing that he has a previous grudge with the visiting monk, thinks to himself, "I have an opportunity now, I should give him a broken room so that he will surely die."

便與敗房柱壁危壞，近毘多羅恐怖之處、富單那諸惡鬼處、近蚖蛇處。
He gives him a room with broken pillars and walls that are about to collapse, near a terrifying place with ghosts and poisonous snakes.

若示與時，得越比尼罪；彼受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；若死者，波羅夷。
If he shows him the room, he incurs a minor offense; if the monk suffers pain, he incurs a more serious offense; if the monk dies, it is a major offense.

彼客比丘晨朝起，從舊比丘索洗手物，舊比丘取蜂蝎蜈蚣蚖蛇著瓶中，覆口語客比丘言：「是瓶中有洗手物，汝恣意取用。」
The visiting monk wakes up in the morning and asks the resident monk for handwashing items. The resident monk puts bees, scorpions, centipedes, and snakes into a jar, covers it, and tells the visiting monk, "This jar has handwashing items, you may use them as you wish."

客比丘取時，得越比尼罪；受苦痛時，得偷蘭罪；若死者，波羅夷。
When the visiting monk takes it, the resident monk incurs a minor offense; if the monk suffers pain, a more serious offense; if he dies, it is a major offense.

是名僧坊殺。
This is called "murder in the monastery."



虎者，阿練若住處常有虎害人，

As for tigers, there are often tigers harming people in the Aranya dwelling place,

時眾集聚一處作是議言：「諸長老！是中阿練若住處，有虎恐傷害人，誰能伏此虎者？」

At that time, the assembly gathered in one place to discuss: "Elders! In this Aranya dwelling, there are tigers, and we fear they may harm people. Who can subdue these tigers?"

爾時眾中有一比丘，與一比丘有嫌，語眾人言：「我能伏虎。」

At that time, among the assembly, there was a monk who had resentment towards another monk, and he said to the people: "I can subdue the tigers."

是比丘向暮持弓箭出，

That monk went out towards evening with a bow and arrow,

彼時所嫌比丘著黃色衣頭面黑，出到大小行處。

At that time, the monk he resented was wearing yellow clothes, with a black face and head, going to the large and small places.

是比丘爾時欲殺比丘而殺虎者，得越比尼罪；

If that monk intended to kill the monk but killed the tiger, he would incur a level of offenses known as Parajika or "defeat."

若欲殺虎而殺比丘者，得越比尼罪；

If he intended to kill the tiger but killed the monk, he would incur a level of offenses known as Parajika or "defeat."

欲殺比丘而殺比丘者，波羅夷。

If he intended to kill the monk and did kill the monk, it is Parajika.

欲殺虎而殺虎者，波逸提。

If he intended to kill the tiger and did kill the tiger, it is a minor offense known as Pakittiya.

若二處俱有殺心而害者，隨其所殺得罪，比丘則波羅夷，虎則波逸提。

If he had the intention to kill in both cases and harmed, the penalty depends on who was killed: if the monk, it is Parajika, if the tiger, it is Pakittiya.

是名虎。

This is called a tiger.



外道者，有諸外道奉事日月

There are outsiders who worship the sun and moon.

日月蝕時諸婆羅門群儻相逐，手執器杖舉聲喚呼，為救日月故過精舍邊，見諸比丘便瞋恚言：

At the time of the solar and lunar eclipse, Brahmins crowd together, holding staffs and making loud cries, passing near the monastery with the intention of saving the sun and moon, they see the monks and angrily say:

「是沙門釋子是阿脩羅黨，今當殺之。」

"These Shakyamuni disciples are part of the Asura party, now we should kill them."

時比丘聞是惡音聲，聞是惡音聲已即打揵椎集僧，

At that time, when the monks heard this hostile voice, they immediately rang the bell to gather the monks.

有比丘言：「我等今日當共作要，治此惡邪外道，無使一人得活。」

A monk said: "Today we should make a pact to confront these evil heretics, not allowing a single one to survive."

作非法要故，一切僧得越比尼罪；

Because of this unlawful pact, all monks incurred the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

彼受苦痛，一切僧得偷蘭罪；

If they experience suffering, all monks incur the offense of "Taking What is Not Given."

若彼死者，一切僧得波羅夷。

If they die, all monks incur the offense of "Parajika."

若共要言：「莫令使死，但受苦痛，改惡思善。」

If the agreement is: "Do not let them die, but let them suffer and change from evil to good."

若作此要，一切僧得越比尼罪；

If this agreement is made, all monks incur the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

受苦痛時，一切僧得偷蘭罪。

When they suffer pain, all monks incur the offense of "Taking What is Not Given."

爾時諸比丘言：「諸長老！不應害彼，亦不應加痛於人。

At that time, the monks said: "Elders! We should not harm them, nor should we cause pain to others.

如世尊說：『比丘！若賊怨家，若以鋸刀割截身體，

As the Blessed One has said: 'If thieves and enemies use a saw to cut your body,

爾時不應起惡心，口不應惡語加人，

you should not harbor evil thoughts, nor speak harsh words.

當起慈心、饒益心、忍辱心。』

You should cultivate a mind of compassion, goodwill, and forbearance.'"

諸比丘當共思惟世尊《鋸刀喻經》，少作方便能行忍辱，

The monks should contemplate the Blessed One's "Simile of the Saw Sutra" to practice patience with some skill.

然後但牢閉門戶，舉聲大喚恐彼外道。」

Then securely close the doors and loudly shout to frighten the outsiders."

無罪。一切僧共作法要誓，一切僧無罪。

Without offense. If all monks make a pact together, all monasteries are unblamed.

有一比丘打婆羅門子垂死，便自思惟：

A monk strikes a Brahmin boy, leaving him nearly dead, and then reflects:

「此人若死者，破沙門釋子法，今當求醫治之令差。」

"If this person dies, it breaks the discipline of the Shakyamuni followers, I must seek medical treatment to heal him."

若更有異比丘語是比丘：「汝作何等？」

If another monk asks him: "What did you do?"

答言：「我打是婆羅門垂死，我還自念：『若當死者，破沙門釋子法，今欲求醫治之令差。』

He answers: "I struck this Brahmin, leaving him near death. I contemplated: 'If he dies, it breaks our discipline, so I will seek medical help.'"

若異比丘言：「汝去覓醫，我為汝守之。」

If another monk says: "You go find a doctor, I will guard him for you."

是打比丘去後，異比丘於後便竟其命。

After the striking monk leaves, the other monk ends the person's life.

前打比丘，得偷蘭罪；

The monk who struck first incurs the offense of "Taking What is Not Given."

後殺比丘，得波羅夷。

The monk who kills afterward incurs the offense of "Parajika."

此名外道。

This is called a heretic.

若一比丘為殺人故，捉刀，得越比尼罪；

If one monk, intending to kill, grabs a knife, he incurs the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

若觸彼身，得偷蘭罪；

If he touches the person, he incurs the offense of "Taking What is Not Given."

若彼死，波羅夷。

If the person dies, it is "Parajika."

若二、若三乃至眾多，為殺人故，捉刀，得越比尼罪；

If two, three, or numerous monks, intending to kill, grab a knife, they incur the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

乃至死，得波羅夷。

If it leads to death, it is "Parajika."

若一比丘遣一比丘，為殺人故，捉刀時，得越比尼罪；

If one monk sends another monk, with the intention to kill, to grab a knife, they incur the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

乃至死，波羅夷。

If it leads to death, it is "Parajika."

遣二人、遣三人乃至眾多比丘，

Sending two, three, or numerous monks,

為殺人故，捉刀時，得越比尼罪；

with the intention to kill, to grab a knife incurs the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

乃至死，波羅夷。

If it leads to death, it is "Parajika."

受遣比丘為殺人故，復遣一比丘捉刀，得越比尼罪；

The dispatched monk, intending to kill, sends another monk to grab a knife, incurring the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

乃至死犯，波羅夷。

If it results in death, it is "Parajika."

如是第二、第三，

Thus, in the second, third instances,

乃至遣眾多比丘捉刀時，得越比尼罪；

up to sending numerous monks to grab a knife, they incur the offense of "Defeating a Precept."

乃至死，波羅夷。

If it leads to death, it is "Parajika."

如是毒殺、塗殺、吐下殺、墮胎殺、說相殺、歎譽殺亦如是。

Similarly, poisoning to kill, smearing to kill, using spells to kill, causing a miscarriage, using speech to kill, and killing by praising are all the same.




殺人，犯波羅夷。
There are five conditions for the complete act of killing, which constitutes a Parajika offense.

何等五？
What are these five?

一者人；
First, a living being.

二者人想；
Second, perceiving the being as such.

三者興方便；
Third, the intention to kill.

四者殺心；
Fourth, the murderous mind.

五者斷命。
Fifth, the act resulting in death.

是名五事。
These are called the five conditions.

若遣奴殺，
If one sends a servant to kill,

若作人、若知識、
or instructs others, whether acquaintances or strangers, 

若試作、若未曾作而作，無智無羞淨想，皆犯。
or tries to kill without previous knowledge of it, without wisdom, without sense of shame, purity, all are offenses.

不犯者，狂癡、心亂，無罪。
There is no offense for those who are insane or mentally disturbed; they are blameless.

是故說：
Therefore it is said:

「若比丘自手奪人命，
“If a monk takes a life with his own hands,

求持刀與殺者，
or seeks a knife for a killer,

教死、歎死：
or instructs others to die or praises death by saying,

『咄！人用惡活為？
‘Alas! Why live a bad life?

死勝生。』
Death is better than life.’

作是意、作是想，
If he acts with such intent, such thoughts,

方便歎譽死、快令彼人死，非餘者，
and praises death, or causes the person to die quickly, not by other means,

是比丘波羅夷，不應共住。」
the monk commits a Parajika and should not stay with the Community


世尊於毘舍離城，成佛六年冬分第三半月九日，食前北向坐一人半影，

The Blessed One was in the city of Vaishali, six years after attaining Buddhahood, on the ninth day of the third half-month of winter, sitting facing north before a meal, with one and a half shadows.

為眾多看病比丘、因鹿杖外道制此戒。

For the sake of many monks who were caring for the sick, he established this precept due to the practices of ascetics who use deer staffs.

已制當隨順行，是名隨順法。(第三戒竟)

Once established, it should be followed accordingly, and this is termed an auxiliary rule. (End of the third precept)




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Buddha lived in the city of Shravasti, and spoke extensively as above.

爾時一聚落中有二眾安居，時一眾安居訖還舍衛城，問訊世尊頂禮佛足在一面坐。
At that time, in a village, two groups were residing, and when one group had completed their residence, they returned to Shravasti, paid respects to the Buddha, touched the Buddha's feet, and sat down to one side.

世尊知而故問：「比丘！汝何處安居來？」
The World-Honored One knew this and asked, "Monks! From where have you come after staying for the retreat?"

答言：「某處聚落安居。」
They replied, "From residing in a certain village."

佛問比丘：「安居樂不？乞食易得不？行道如法不？安居訖已得安居衣不？諸優婆塞數來往不？」
The Buddha asked, "Was your stay during the retreat enjoyable? Was it easy to get food? Did you follow the path according to the Dharma? After the retreat, did you get your residence clothes? Did the Upasakas frequently come and go?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！夏安居樂，行道如法，乞食難得，衣物不足，諸優婆塞不數來往。」
The monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! The summer retreat was enjoyable, we followed the path according to the Dharma, but it was difficult to get food, clothes were insufficient, and the Upasakas did not frequently visit."

佛告諸比丘：「出家人何能恒得世利？
The Buddha said to the monks, "How can those who have left home always get worldly gains?

比丘當知，世間八法常隨世人，世人亦常隨世八法。」
Monks, you should know that the eight worldly conditions always follow people, and people always follow these eight worldly conditions."

何等為八？一利、二不利、三稱、四不稱、五譽、六毀、七樂、八苦。
What are the eight? Gain, loss, fame, defamation, praise, blame, pleasure, and pain.

如是比丘！愚癡凡夫少聞少知，於正法中心不調伏，於賢聖法心未開解。
Monks, in this way, foolish ordinary people with little hearing and knowledge do not discipline their hearts in true Dharma, and their hearts do not open to understanding in the noble Dharma.

若世利起，不善觀察是世利生即是無常磨滅之法。
If worldly gains arise, they do not skillfully observe that these gains are indeed impermanent and subject to decay.

若法真實無常磨滅者，當知是利雖生，速滅不住。
If the principle is truly impermanent and subject to decay, one should know that even though gain arises, it quickly vanishes and does not remain.

若不觀察此真實義，是為凡夫無實智慧隨順世法。
If one does not observe this true principle, they are considered ordinary people without true wisdom, following worldly ways.

如是不利乃至樂苦，亦不觀察是樂雖生即是無常磨滅之法。
Similarly, losses, and even pleasures and pains, they also do not observe this, that even though pleasure arises, it is impermanent and subject to decay.

若法真實無常磨滅者，當知是樂苦雖生，速滅不住。
If the principle is truly impermanent and subject to decay, one should know that even though pleasure and pain arise, they quickly vanish and do not remain.

若不觀此真實義者，是為凡夫無實智慧隨順世法。
If one does not observe this true principle, they are considered ordinary people without true wisdom, following worldly ways.

比丘當知，於此世法不觀察故，若世利起則生貪著，若利不起則生憂患，乃至樂苦亦復如是。
Monks, you should know that, due to not observing these worldly conditions, if worldly gain arises, greed and attachment develop, if gain does not arise, sorrow and worry develop, and it is the same for pleasure and pain.

比丘！如是三受增長，三受既增、四取熾然，四取熾然故則有生，緣生老病死憂悲苦惱、心亂發狂，如是習起苦陰增廣。
Monks! In this way, three feelings grow, and when these three feelings grow, the four clingings blaze. Because the four clingings blaze, there is birth, leading to old age, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, mental chaos, and madness, thus increasing the mass of suffering.

比丘當知，賢聖弟子多聞智慧，於正法中心善調伏，賢聖法中心得開解。
Monks, you should know that the wise disciples of the noble ones, with extensive hearing and wisdom, discipline their hearts well in the true Dharma and open their hearts to understanding in the noble Dharma.

世利既生，當善觀察世利起者皆悉無常磨滅之法。
When worldly gain arises, they should skillfully observe that all worldly gains are impermanent and subject to decay.

若法真實無常磨滅者，當知是利雖起，速滅不住，乃至樂苦皆悉如是。
If the principle is truly impermanent and subject to decay, they should know that even though gain arises, it quickly vanishes and does not remain, and it is the same for pleasure and pain.

比丘當知，作是觀者，若世利起不生貪著，世利不起心不憂慼，乃至樂苦亦復如是。
Monks, you should know that those who observe in this way, if worldly gain arises, do not develop greed and attachment, and if gain does not arise, they do not develop sorrow and distress, and it is the same for pleasure and pain.

愛憎不生，諸覺隨順離諸憂慼，乃至樂苦苦陰滅盡則得涅槃。」
Love and hatred do not arise, and various perceptions follow the path of not being entangled with sorrow and distress, and thus, when the masses of pleasure and pain are extinguished, Nirvana is attained."

爾時世尊說是法已，重說偈言：
At that time, after the World-Honored One had spoken this Dharma, he further said in verse:



利衰及毁誉，  
Gain and loss, fame and shame,

称讥若苦乐；  
Praise and criticism, like joy and sorrow;




八法常相尋，
The eight methods constantly seek each other,

往復若迴轉。
Going back and forth like revolving.



八法不牢固，
The eight methods are not stable,

磨滅變化法；
They are subject to erosion and change;




所謂聖弟子，　　
So-called holy disciples,

執照無常鏡；
Handling the mirror of impermanence;




諦觀世八法，
Observe closely the eight worldly dharmas,

俄頃不暫停。
They do not cease, even for a moment.




在四樂利中， 
In the four benefits of happiness,

未曾有變動，
There has never been any change,




若遭毀譏謗，
If subjected to defamation and criticism,

憂慼不經心；
do not let sorrow dwell in your heart;




若離世八法，

If one is free from the eight worldly concerns,

是名智慧士，

Such a person is called a wise one,




能出欲河流，
Can cross the river of desire,

度脫生死海。
to transcend the sea of life and death.




是時諸比丘聞佛所說皆大歡喜，俱白佛言：「世尊善哉！
At that time, all the monks, having heard what the Buddha said, were very happy and said to the Buddha, "Well said, World Honored One!

善巧方便說世八法，未曾有也。」
Skillfully explaining the eight worldly truths with expedient means, this is unprecedented."

佛告諸比丘：「如來、應供、正遍知三達無礙，智慧之明如月盛滿，
The Buddha said to the monks, "The Tathagata, worthy of offerings, completely and perfectly enlightened, has unobstructed clarity in the three understandings, and wisdom as bright as the full moon.

說世八法何足為奇？
Speaking of the eight worldly truths is not something extraordinary.

我於昔時畜生道中作鸚鵡鳥，能為餘鳥說世八法，此乃為奇。」
In a past life, during the time when I was in the animal realm as a parrot, I was able to speak of the eight worldly truths to other birds, and that is truly amazing."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」
The monks said to the Buddha, "Did that indeed happen?"

佛言：「如是！過去世時有一國王，養二鸚鵡：一名羅大，二名波羅，皆解人語。
The Buddha said, "Yes! In a past life, there was a king who kept two parrots: one named Loda, the other named Bala, both capable of understanding human speech.

王甚愛念，盛以金籠，食輒同案。
The king was very fond of them, keeping them in a golden cage and feeding them at the same table.

時有大臣，持一獼猴兒奉上大王，
Then, a minister brought a young monkey to the king,

人情樂新，王即愛念，飲食飼養勝於鸚鵡。
People tend to favor the new, and the king immediately took a liking to it, feeding and taking care of it better than the parrots.

時波羅鸚鵡子便為羅大而說偈言：
At that time, the parrot Bala spoke a verse to Loda:



先與王同食，
Let's eat with the king first,

世間之上饌；
the best delicacies in the world;




今為獼猴奪，

Now seized by the monkeys,

宜共𣣋虛逝。

We should let it go peacefully.




爾時羅大答言：
At that time, Lord Radha replied:

『斯皆亦無常。
"These are all impermanent.

今此獼猴子，不久復當失此利養。』
Now this young monkey will soon lose this gain and support."

即為波羅而說偈言：
Then he spoke a verse for the king:




利衰及毀譽，
Gain and loss, as well as praise and blame,

稱譏若苦樂；
Are like honor and criticism, happiness and suffering;




斯皆非常法，   
These are all extraordinary ways,   

何足致憂喜？   
Why let them cause worry or joy?   




是時波羅復說偈言：
At that time, Bālā recited a verse again:

一切諸希有　　大精進能仁
All the rare phenomena, through great diligence, realized the Buddha;

心行常平等　　夫有無智慧
The conduct of the mind is always impartial, there is wisdom in both existence and non-existence;

稽首如來前　　誓成最正覺
I bow before the Tathāgata, vowing to achieve supreme enlightenment.

願此微妙法　　利樂諸群生
I hope this subtle Dharma benefits and brings joy to all sentient beings.



觸目覩不歡，

Seeing unpleasant sights,

無有愛樂相，

No images of love and joy,




但聞毀呰聲，
I only hear voices of slander,

永無稱譽者，
Never those of praise.




肆我飛禽志，  
How do I imitate the aspirations of a bird?

何為受斯苦？  
Why do I endure this suffering?




是獼猴子小時毛色潤澤跳踉超擲，人所戲弄。
When the young monkey had sleek fur and leaped agilely, he was played with by people.

漸至長大衣毛憔悴人所惡見，竪耳張口恐怖小兒。
As he grew, his fur became dull, making him disliked by people, who feared him and his gaping mouth and pricked ears scared children.

爾時羅大鸚鵡子便說此偈謂波羅言：
Then, the great parrot named Rā spoke this verse to Bāla:



「竪耳𭽭𥀝面，

Erect ears and a clear face,

嘊喍怖童子，

The child frightened and noisy,




坐自生罪累，
Sitting by oneself breeds guilt.

不久失利養。
Soon losing the benefits of nurture.




是獼猴轉大，王愛意遂盡，即勅左右令繫馬槽柱。
As the monkey grew bigger, the king's affection waned, so he ordered his men to tie it to the horse trough pillar.

時王子年小，手捉飲食至獼猴邊。
At that time, the young prince brought food to the monkey.

獼猴索食，王子不與，獼猴瞋怒爴王子面傷、壞裂衣服。
The monkey asked for food, but the prince refused, so the monkey became angry, scratched the prince's face, and tore his clothes.

王子驚怖，舉聲大喚。
The prince was frightened and cried out loudly.

王問傍人：『兒何以涕？』
The king asked his attendants, "Why is the child crying?"

傍人以事答王。
The attendants explained the situation to the king.

王便大瞋勅人打殺，擲著塹中令曼陀食。
The king, in great anger, ordered the monkey to be killed and thrown into the moat to feed the mandas.

時波羅鸚鵡子即為羅大而說偈言：
At that time, the parrot king spoke a verse to the young prince:



你是智慧者，預見未來，

You are the wise one, who foresees the future,




禽獸無知喪，
The ignorant beasts are lost,

為彼曼陀食。』
and they become food for the mandala.



佛告諸比丘：「爾時羅大鸚鵡子豈異人乎？
The Buddha said to the monks, "Was the parrot of those times a different person?

即我身是。
It was indeed my own self.

波羅鸚鵡子者，即阿難是。
The parrot named Bala was Ananda.

我為鸚鵡時，以能為彼說世八法無常遷變不可久保，
When I was a parrot, I was able to explain to him the impermanence and change of the worldly eight phenomena, which cannot be maintained for long.

況復今成正覺說世八法，何足為奇？」
How much more so now that I have achieved perfect enlightenment, explaining the worldly eight phenomena is nothing remarkable?"



時彼第二眾安居竟，尋即來至禮世尊足於一面坐。
When the rainy season retreat of the second group ended, they came to pay homage to the Blessed One and sat to one side.

世尊知而故問：「比丘何處安居來？」
The Blessed One, knowing this, asked: "Monk, from where did you come dwelling?"

答言：「世尊！某處安居。」
He replied: "Blessed One, I resided at a certain place."

佛問比丘：「安居樂不？行道疲不？乞食易得不？夏安居竟得安居衣不？諸優婆塞數來往不？」
The Buddha asked the monk: "Was your dwelling pleasant? Were you tired from walking? Was it easy to get alms? When the rainy season retreat ended, did you get robes for dwelling? Did many lay followers come and go?"

諸比丘白佛言：「夏安居樂、行道不疲、乞食易得、多得安居衣、諸優婆塞來往者眾。」
The monks replied to the Buddha: "The rainy season retreat was pleasant, we were not tired from walking, it was easy to get alms, we received many robes for dwelling, and there were numerous lay followers coming and going."

佛問比丘：「有何因緣，二眾俱共依一聚落安居，一眾獨多得供養，一眾不得？」
The Buddha asked the monk: "What is the reason that when two groups reside together in one settlement, one group receives much support, while the other does not?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！我等無量方便讚歎三寶，亦常讚歎佛大弟子尊者舍利弗、大目揵連等，及自讚歎所修習功德。」
The monks replied to the Buddha: "Blessed One, we used various means to praise the Three Jewels, and often praised the eminent disciples of the Buddha, such as Venerable Sariputta and Maha Moggallana, as well as praised our own cultivated virtues."

佛問比丘：「汝所讚歎為實爾不？」
The Buddha asked the monk: "Is what you praise truthful?"

「世尊！我所讚歎三寶，及尊者舍利弗等是實，自讚歎不實。」
"Blessed One, what I praised about the Three Jewels and Venerable Sariputta, etc., is true, but my self-praise is not."

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事。云何為身利養，不實空自讚歎？
The Buddha said: "Monk, this is a bad thing. How can one seek personal gain by empty self-praise that is untruthful?

寧噉灰炭、吞食糞土、利刀破腹，不以虛妄稱過人法而得供養。」
It is better to eat ashes, swallow filth, or cut open one's belly with a sharp knife than to receive offerings by falsely claiming superior qualities."

佛告比丘：「我常讚歎少欲知足，汝等云何多欲難滿廣求無厭？
The Buddha told the monks: "I always praise having few desires and being content. How can you have many desires that are insatiable, seeking broadly without end?

此非法、非律、非是佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not the Dharma, not the discipline, nor Buddha's teachings, and cannot cultivate good qualities."

世尊種種呵責是比丘已。
The Blessed One reproached those monks in various ways.



諸比丘在彼聚落安居時，入村乞食有自稱譽者乞食易得，不自稱譽者極甚難得。
When the monks lived in that settlement, those who boasted about themselves found it easy to beg for food in the village, while those who did not boast found it extremely difficult.

時有一長老比丘，便作是念：「我何為虛妄而自讚歎，得過人法以自活命？我從今日不復虛妄而自稱譽。」
At that time, there was an elder monk who thought, "Why should I boast falsely and praise myself to get by in life? From today onwards, I will not boast falsely and praise myself."

晨朝著入聚落衣持鉢乞食，時有人問言：「長老！汝於聖果有所得不？」
In the morning, he put on his robes and took his bowl to beg for food in the village. Someone asked him, "Elder! Have you attained any fruits of holiness?"

是比丘便不自稱譽，即時乞食處處不得。
The monk did not boast about himself, and immediately found it difficult to get food anywhere.

日時欲過飢乏羸頓，復自稱譽即有所得。
By midday, he was weak with hunger, so he boasted again and immediately obtained food.

有異比丘聞是長老須臾妄語、須臾實語，便白佛言：「世尊！云何是長老比丘志弱無恒輕躁乃爾？」
Another monk heard that the elder sometimes spoke falsely and sometimes truthfully, and reported to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Why is this elder monk so weak-willed, inconsistent, and fickle?"

佛告諸比丘：「是長老不但今日志弱無恒輕躁，過去世時亦復如是。」
The Buddha told the monks, "This elder has not only been weak-willed, inconsistent, and fickle today, but also in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！已曾爾耶？」
The monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Has it always been like this?"

佛言：「如是！過去世時非時連雨七日不止，諸放牧者七日不出。」
The Buddha said, "Indeed! In a past life, when it rained continuously for seven months without stopping, the shepherds did not come out for seven days."

時有餓狼飢行求食遍歷聚落，乃至七村都無所得，便自剋責：『我何薄相，經歷七村都無所得？我今不如守齋而住。』
At that time, a hungry wolf roamed the villages seeking food, and after visiting seven villages without finding anything, it blamed itself, saying, 'Why am I so unfortunate to find nothing after visiting seven villages? I might as well observe a fast and stay here.'

便還山林自於窟穴呪願言：『使一切眾生皆得安隱。』然後攝身安坐閉目思惟。
So it returned to the forest, went into its cave, and made a vow, 'May all beings be at peace and safe,' then sat down, closed its eyes, and meditated.

天帝釋法至齋日，月八日、十四日、十五日，乘伊羅白龍象下觀察世間：何等眾生孝順父母，供養沙門婆羅門，布施持戒修梵行受八戒者？
Indra, on the fast days, the eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days of the lunar month, rode his white dragon elephant to observe the world: which beings are filial to their parents, offer alms to monks and Brahmins, practice giving, uphold precepts, and observe the eight precepts?

時釋提桓因周行觀察到彼山窟，見此狼閉目思惟，便作是念：『咄哉！狼獸甚為奇特，人尚無有此心，況此狼獸而能如是！』
During his rounds, Indra arrived at the mountain cave, saw the wolf meditating with eyes closed, and thought, 'Alas! This wolf is quite extraordinary. Even humans do not have such thoughts, yet this wolf does!'

便欲試之知其虛實。
He wanted to test it to know whether it was genuine or false.

釋即變身化為一羊在窟前住，高聲命群。
Indra transformed himself into a sheep and stood in front of the cave, calling out loudly.

狼時見羊便作是念：『奇哉！齋福報應忽至，我遊七村求食不獲，今暫守齋餚饍自來。厨供已到今但當食，食已然後守齋。』
When the wolf saw the sheep, it thought, 'How strange! The reward of fasting has suddenly come. I wandered through seven villages without food, and now, by just observing a fast for a while, food has come to me. I should eat now, then continue fasting afterward.'

即便出穴往趣羊所。
So it immediately left the cave and went towards the sheep.

羊見狼來便驚奔走，狼便尋逐羊去不住。
The sheep saw the wolf coming and fled in fright, with the wolf chasing after it relentlessly.

追之既遠羊化為狗，方口耽耳反來逐狼急聲吠之。
When it had chased the sheep some distance, the sheep transformed into a dog, with ears erect, and turned to chase the wolf, barking loudly.

狼見狗來驚怖還走，狗急追之，劣乃得免。
The wolf, frightened by the approaching dog, ran back in fear, with the dog chasing it fervently until it barely escaped.

還至窟穴便作是念：『我欲食彼，反欲噉我。』
Back in the cave, the wolf thought, 'I wanted to eat it, but instead, it wanted to eat me.'

爾時帝釋復於狼前，作跛脚羊鳴喚而住，狼作是念：『前者是狗，我飢悶眼花謂為是羊。今所見者此真是羊。』
Then, Indra transformed again in front of the wolf, this time as a lame sheep, calling out and standing there. The wolf thought, 'Earlier, that was a dog. My hunger and dizziness made me mistake it for a sheep. What I see now is a real sheep.'

復更諦觀，看耳角毛尾真實是羊，便出往趣。
It carefully observed again, looking at the ears, horns, fur, and tail, and confirmed it was truly a sheep, then went towards it.

羊復驚走，奔逐垂得，復化作狗反還逐狼亦復如前，『我欲食彼，反欲見噉。』
The sheep fled again, and as the wolf was about to get it, it transformed back into a dog and chased the wolf as before, 'I wanted to eat it, but instead, it wanted to eat me.'

時天帝釋即於狼前化為羔子鳴群喚母，狼便瞋言：『汝作肉段我尚不出，況為羔子而欲見欺。』
Indra then transformed in front of the wolf as a lamb, calling out to its mother. The wolf angrily said, 'Even if you become a piece of meat, I will not go out, let alone a lamb trying to trick me.'

還更守齋靜心思惟。
So it returned to the cave, continued fasting, and meditated calmly.

時天帝釋知狼心念還齋，猶故作羊羔於狼前住。
Indra knew the wolf's mind had returned to fasting, but still, he turned into a lamb and stood before the wolf.

時狼便說偈言：
At that time, the wolf recited a verse:



若真實為羊，  
If true, it's a sheep,

猶故不能出；  
Still, it cannot escape;




况复作虚妄，
How much more if I fabricate falsehoods,

如前恐怖我。
Frightening myself as before.




見我還齋已，　　
When you see me returning to my quarters,

汝復來見試；
You come again to test me;



假如是肉段，　　仍然不可信。

If it were a piece of meat, it still wouldn't be credible.




況作羊羔子，　　
As lambs, 

而詐喚咩咩。
pretend to bleat like sheep.




於是世尊而說偈言：
Then the World Honored One spoke in verse:



「若有出家人，　　
If there is a monk,

持戒心輕躁，
whose mind is careless in maintaining precepts,



不能舍利養，

Unable to abandon the benefits and nurturance,

猶如狼守齋。」

is like a wolf keeping a fast."




諸比丘：「彼時狼者豈異人乎？即此比丘是。

At that time, the World-Honored One told the monks: "Was that wolf a different person? It was this very monk.

本為狼時志操無恒，今雖出家心故輕躁。」

When he was a wolf, his determination was unstable; even though he has now renounced the world, his mind is still restless."

爾時世尊告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城諸比丘皆悉令集，

At that time, the World-Honored One said to the monks: "All the monks residing in the city of Shravasti should gather together,

以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

As the ten benefits, for the sake of the monks, the precepts are established, so those who have already heard should hear it again.

若比丘未知未了，自稱得過人法、聖知見殊勝，

If a monk, not knowing, not understanding, claims to have obtained superhuman achievements and superior sacred insight,

如是知、如是見者，是比丘得波羅夷，不應共住。

For those who know and see this way, this monk has committed a Parajika offense and should not dwell together."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in Shravasti and elaborated on the teachings there.

時有二比丘在阿練若處住，其一比丘暫成就根力覺道，
At that time, two monks were staying in the forest. One monk temporarily attained the path of enlightenment through the power of the faculties.

貪恚不起，語第二比丘言：「長老是我善知識所敬重者，今欲向長老說密事。」
Free from greed and anger, he said to the second monk, "Venerable, you are my respected good friend. I now wish to tell you a secret."

彼言：「汝欲說何等？」
The second monk replied, "What do you wish to tell?"

便言：「長老！我得阿羅漢。」
He said, "Venerable! I have attained Arhatship."

彼即答言：「長老！世尊在世親受法教，勤修精進得成道果，是其宜耳！」
The second monk replied, "Venerable! You personally received the teachings from the Buddha and diligently practiced to attain the fruit of the path. That is only fitting!"

是比丘後時遊諸聚落，放縱諸根廢習止觀，
Later, the monk roamed through various villages, indulging his senses and abandoning the practice of Samatha and Vipassana.

便起煩惱覺癡愛生，便語其伴：「我本謂有所得，定自未得。」
Then, defilements and ignorance arose, and he said to his companion, "I originally believed I had attained something, but evidently, I have not."

何以知之？自覺心中煩惱猶在。
How do I know? Because I still perceive defilements in my mind.

彼比丘言：「長老妄稱得過人法，犯波羅夷。」
His companion said, "Venerable, you falsely claimed to have attained superhuman dharma and committed a serious offense."

是比丘言：「我非知而妄語，謂為實耳。」
The monk said, "I did not knowingly speak falsely; I believed it to be true."

諸比丘以是事具白世尊：「某甲比丘妄語自稱得過人法。」
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One, saying, "A certain monk falsely claimed to have attained superhuman dharma."

佛言：「呼來！」來已，佛問比丘：「汝實虛妄自稱得過人法耶？」
The Buddha said, "Call him here!" When he came, the Buddha asked, "Did you falsely claim to have attained superhuman dharma?"

「世尊！我不虛妄自稱得過人法，我想謂得，如是想說耳。」
"Blessed One! I did not falsely claim to have attained superhuman dharma. I believed I had attained it and thus spoke."

佛問比丘：「汝何因緣而作是說？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "What was the reason for you to say this?"

比丘白佛言：「世尊！我於阿練若處住，修習根力覺道，煩惱不起。
The monk replied to the Buddha, "Blessed One! While residing in the forest, I practiced developing the faculties and defilements did not arise.

我謂得阿羅漢，便語同伴說己所得。
I believed I had attained Arhatship and told my companion what I had attained.

我於餘時遊行聚落，不攝諸根煩惱便起。
Later, when roaming the villages, I did not restrain my senses, and defilements arose.

即生疑悔語是比丘，非是虛妄。
I then spoke to the monk out of doubt and regret, not out of falsity."

爾時世尊告諸比丘：「是比丘非故虛妄說得過人法，當知此比丘是增上慢。」
Then the Blessed One told the monks, "This monk did not intentionally falsely claim to have attained superhuman dharma. Know that this monk has spiritual conceit."

佛告比丘：「云何於正法中信家非家、捨家出家起增上慢？
The Buddha said to the monk, "How can you, who have faith in the true dharma and went forth from home, give rise to spiritual conceit?

汝當方便除增上慢可得羅漢。」
You should skillfully eliminate spiritual conceit and then attain Arhatship."

時彼比丘大自慚愧，即於佛前精進方便修行正觀，除增上慢得羅漢果。
At that time, the monk, feeling great shame, diligently practiced right contemplation in front of the Buddha, eliminated spiritual conceit, and attained the fruit of Arhatship.




諸比丘白佛言：「甚奇世尊！是比丘蒙佛慈恩，精勤方便修行正觀，除增上慢得羅漢果。」

The monks said to the Buddha, "It's miraculous, World Honored One! This monk has received your compassionate grace, diligently practiced right contemplation, eradicated arrogance and attained Arhatship."

佛告諸比丘：「是比丘不但今日蒙我恩故，精勤方便修習正觀，除增上慢得羅漢果。」

The Buddha told the monks, "This monk did not only today receive my grace, diligently practice, and attain Arhatship by removing arrogance."

過去世時亦蒙我恩，精勤不懈獲大果報。」

In the past lives, he also received my grace, practiced diligently and tirelessly, and reaped great rewards."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」

The monks asked the Buddha, "Was that so?"

佛言：「如是。」

The Buddha said, "Yes, it is so."

佛告諸比丘：「過去世時有國名迦尸城名波羅奈，時彼國中人民豐樂三毒熾盛。

The Buddha told the monks, "In a past life, there was a country named Kashi, with a city called Varanasi, where people were prosperous, but the three poisons were rampant.

有一貧窮婆羅門，從外聚落來入城內。

A poor Brahmin came into the city from an outside settlement.

是節會日，城中諸人有乘象者、有乘馬者、有乘車者、有乘輿者，洗浴塗香著新衣服，五欲自恣種種戲樂。

On a festival day, people in the city rode elephants, horses, carriages, palanquins, bathed, applied perfumes, wore new clothes, and indulged in various pleasures.

時婆羅門渴愛心生，便問人言：『此諸人輩作何因緣得是快樂？』

The Brahmin, full of desire, asked people: 'What causes have led these people to such happiness?'

答言：『婆羅門，汝不知耶？』

They answered: 'Brahmin, do you not know?'

答言：『不知。』

He replied: 'I do not know.'

時人便語婆羅門：『是輩先世修行功德，又復今世勤為家業，故得斯樂。』

They said to the Brahmin: 'These people practiced good deeds in previous lives and are diligent in their occupations in this life, hence they enjoy such happiness.'

時婆羅門便作是念：『此諸人等手足四體與我無異，我今但當勤身傭力，可得財物自恣快樂，與彼無異。』

The Brahmin thought: 'These people's limbs are no different from mine. I should work hard with my labor to gain wealth and enjoy pleasures like them.'

便自還家謂其婦言：『我欲遠行傭力求財。』

He returned home and told his wife: 'I want to go far to work for wealth.'

其婦答言：『隨在近處乞索，趣得飲食兒子，何用遠行？』

His wife replied: 'You can beg nearby to get food and support the children, why go far?'

婆羅門言：『事不獲已，宜當遠行。』

The Brahmin said: 'This is unavoidable; I must go far.'

其婦心念：『其欲去者，知復如何？』語婆羅門：『去留隨意，深自保重。』

His wife thought: 'If he wants to go, what can I do?' She told the Brahmin: 'Go or stay as you wish, take good care of yourself.'

婆羅門勅婦言：『汝自謹慎好看兒子。』

The Brahmin instructed his wife: 'Take good care of our son.'

時婆羅門於是便去至一海邊聚落，見諸商人祠祀聚會宣令里巷：『誰能隨我入海共取珍寶？』

Then the Brahmin went to a coastal settlement and saw merchants declaring in the streets: 'Who can go to sea with us to fetch treasures?'

婆羅門答言：『我欲入海。』

The Brahmin replied: 'I want to go to sea.'

商人問言：『汝有何錢貨？』

The merchants asked: 'What goods do you have?'

答言：『我無錢貨，唯欲從汝乞食，為汝呪願。』

He replied: 'I have no goods; I just wish to beg for food from you and offer prayers for you.'

時諸商人皆為福故語令上船，即得便風至一海渚聚落。

The merchants, for the sake of good fortune, allowed him to board the ship, and with a favorable wind, they reached an island settlement.

時婆羅門入村乞食，並役力求財，得純金三十二段、摩尼珠十四枚，便隨伴還閻浮提。

The Brahmin begged for food in the village, worked hard for wealth, obtained thirty-two pieces of pure gold and fourteen gems, and went back with others to Jambudvipa.

船著岸渚，時婆羅門便大誇說諸商人等：『持財物往今得物還，有何奇特？

The ship reached the shore, and the Brahmin boasted to the merchants: 'Carrying goods away and bringing them back is not special;'

我本空去今得此寶，可謂為奇。

'I left with nothing and now have these treasures; this is truly remarkable.'

不勝歡喜，便捉寶物手中挑弄不止，即失寶物落海水中。

Overwhelmed with joy, he played with his treasures, which accidentally fell into the sea.

時婆羅門甚大憂惱：『我極辛苦得是寶物，如何一旦忽然落水。

The Brahmin was greatly distressed: 'I worked so hard for these treasures; how did they suddenly fall into the water?'

我要當抒海求覓此寶。』

'I must drain the sea to retrieve these treasures.'

即便上岸求得好木，持詣木師所語言：『煩君為我作木魁。』

He then went ashore, found good wood, and asked a woodworker: 'Please make a log for me.'

木師為作已，鏇師為鏇之、鐵師為鍱之。

The woodworker made it, the turner shaped it, and the blacksmith added iron fittings.

得木魁已持詣海次，褰衣袒臂欲抒海水。

With the log ready, he went to the sea, rolled up his clothes, and prepared to drain the sea.

時有海神作是思惟：『是婆羅門欲作何等？我當問之。』

A sea god contemplated: 'What does this Brahmin intend to do? I should ask him.'

即化作婆羅門形往至其所，以偈問言：

The god transformed into a Brahmin form, went to him, and in verse asked:



褰衣而袒臂，
Lifting one's skirts and rolling up sleeves,

怱怱似急事；
Hurriedly as if engaged in urgent business;




我故來問汝，
I have come to ask you,

為欲作何等？』
What is your purpose in doing this?』




時婆羅門以偈答言：

Then the Brahmin replied with a verse:

一切無常，生者必滅。

All things are impermanent; whatever is born is bound to perish. 

不生不死，涅槃寂靜。

Neither birth nor death, Nirvana is serene.

持戒修福，巍巍福營。

Uphold precepts, cultivate merit; towering like a fortress of blessings.

不動之智，常樂我淨。

Unmovable wisdom, eternally blissful, selfless and pure.



「『今此大海水，　　

This great ocean,

深廣眾流主；　　

deep and wide, is the lord of many streams;




我今作方便，  
I now make expedient means,

要欲抒令盡。  
Wishing to fully express and exhaust them.



時海神復說偈言：

At that time, the Sea God spoke these words:

「我本著非常淨戒，

I originally maintained extremely pure precepts,

不惑於名非名所，

not deluded by names or what names refer to,

證於無諍一味法，

realizing the non-contentious, singular truth,

如信所知具無量。」

having complete infinite knowledge like faith.



『大海眾流主，於汝有何過？

'O lord of the ocean's multitude, what fault lies with thee?




而汝作方便，

And you act conveniently,

要欲抒令盡？

What do you want to express completely?




「時婆羅門復說偈言：

Then the Brahmin spoke in verse again:

有族名字中 盡諸生死苦

In the name of the noble family, end all the suffering of birth and death.

如實修梵行 是則名知者

Truly practice the holy life, then one is called a knower.

處處常喜樂 眾所愛如月

Always joyful everywhere, beloved by all like the moon.

苦樂無所著 是則名住道」

Unattached to pleasure and pain, this is called dwelling in the path."




我經大苦難，
I have endured great hardships,

渡海得珍寶，
crossing the sea to acquire treasures,




真金三十二，
Thirty-two real gold,

摩尼有十四。
Fourteen mani (gemstones).




捨船欲上岸，
Abandoning the boat wanting to go ashore,

寶囊落海中；
The precious bag falls into the sea;




我求寶珠故，

I sought the pearl,

抒盡此大海。

Emptying this great ocean.




「時海神復說偈言：

At that time, the sea deity again spoke in verse:




大海甚深廣，
The ocean is extraordinarily deep and vast,

百川眾流主；
the ruler of all rivers and streams;



假使百千岁，  
If a hundred thousand years pass,  

抒之不可尽。  
Still, it cannot be fully expressed.  



時婆羅門復說偈答言：

The Brahmin once again spoke in verse:

「我等不知法，  

"We are unaware of the Dharma,

心常懷疑惑，  

our hearts are often filled with doubts,

云何識聖智慧，  

how can we recognize the wisdom of the holy,

自度生死海。」  

and cross the sea of life and death by ourselves?"




日月長謝無窮盡，
The sun and moon express endless gratitude,

木魁鐵鍱難可壞；
The wood's essence and iron plates are difficult to destroy;



勤力專精不休息，
Diligently devote oneself without rest,

何憂此海不枯竭？
what worry is there that this sea will not dry up?




「時婆羅門說此偈已便抒海水，抒著岸上水還入海。

At that time the Brahmin recited this verse and then started to scoop the seawater, but the water he scooped onto the shore returned to the sea.

是時海神觀彼婆羅門意為懈怠耶？當實堅固？

At that time, the sea god observed whether the Brahmin's intention was slack or truly steadfast.

觀已見婆羅門志意專精永無退期，時海神便作是念：

After observing that the Brahmin's will was focused and determined without any sign of retreat, the sea god thought:

『假使百年抒此海水，終不能減如毛髮許。』

'Even if he scoops this seawater for a hundred years, it will not decrease by even a hair's breadth.'

感其專精即還其寶。

Moved by his determination, the god returned his treasure.

是時海神為婆羅門而說偈言：

At that time, the sea god spoke a verse to the Brahmin:



精勤方便士，
Diligent and skillful person,

志意不休息；
With unwavering determination;



專精之所感，

The feeling of being specialized,

雖失復還得。』

Though lost, it can still be regained.




佛告諸比丘：「時海神者豈異人乎？即我身是也。

The Buddha told the monks, "Is the sea god at that time a different person? It is actually myself.

婆羅門者，此比丘是。

The Brahmin is this monk.

過去世時已曾蒙我精勤方便得大果報，今復蒙我精勤方便，修習正觀除增上慢得阿羅漢。」

In past lives, I diligently helped in skillful ways to achieve great results; now again, through my diligent efforts and the cultivation of correct insight, I have overcome excessive pride and attained Arhatship."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Let all monks in the city of Sāvatthī gather. For the sake of ten benefits, I established the precepts for the monks, and those who have heard should hear again.

若比丘未知未了，自稱得過人法、聖知見殊勝、我如是知、如是見。

If a monk claims to have obtained superhuman qualities or superior knowledge and insight without knowing or understanding,

彼於後時若撿挍、若不撿挍，犯罪欲求清淨故作如是言：

and later at a review time, whether reviewing or not, wanting to be purified from the offense, he says the following:

『長老！我不知言知、不見言見，虛誑不實語。』

‘Elder! I claimed to know what I did not know and see what I did not see, it was a false and untrue statement.’

除增上慢，是比丘得波羅夷，不應共住。」

For overcoming excessive pride, this monk commits a pārājika offense and should not live with the community."




比丘者，乃至年滿二十受具足，是名比丘。
A bhikkhu is someone who has reached the age of twenty and received full ordination, thus is called a bhikkhu.




未知者，無智故。
The unknown is due to a lack of wisdom.




未了者，未斷故。
That which is not finished is because it is not yet severed.




自稱者，稱己也。
The self-proclaimed one is the one who calls themselves so.




得過人法者，人法者，所謂五欲、五下分結、六趣、六諍根、七使、八邪、世八法、九慢、九惱、十善行迹、十惡行迹。
Those who have transcended human laws, these human laws are called the five desires, the five lower fetters, the six realms, the six sources of dispute, the seven afflictions, the eight wrongs, the eight worldly laws, the nine conceits, the nine disturbances, the ten good karmic paths, and the ten evil karmic paths.

復次人法者，如諸天子以偈問佛：
Furthermore, the human laws are like the verses with which celestial beings question the Buddha:



哪种人一心向善？  
What kind of person is inclined to goodness?

何种人能升天？  
What kind of person can ascend to heaven?




何等人晝夜，  
What kind of people, day and night,  

長養善功德？」  
nurture good virtues and merits?"  




爾時世尊以偈答天子言：
At that time, the World-Honored One answered the celestial being with a verse:



曠路作好井，
Along the open road, dig a good well,

種植園果施，
Plant orchards and apply fruit,




樹林施清涼，

The forest provides coolness,

橋船渡人民。

the bridge and boat carry people.




布施修淨戒，
Practice giving and maintain pure precepts,

智慧捨慳貪，
With wisdom, let go of stinginess and greed.




功德日夜增，  
Merits increase day and night,  

常生天人中。  
And you will often be reborn among gods and men.  



是為人法。

This is the human way.

復次孝順父母，供養沙門、婆羅門，及諸尊重修梵行者，是為人法。

Furthermore, filial piety towards parents, offering to ascetics and Brahmins, and respecting noble practitioners of Brahmacharya, this is the human way.

過人法者，十智、法智、未知智、等智、他心智、苦集滅道智、盡智、無生智、滅盡、解脫、增上善心、淳熟善根、淨不淨解脫、明法須陀洹果及所攝三昧，善入出住正受作證。

The transcendental ways are the ten knowledges: knowledge of the Dharma, knowledge of the unknown, equality knowledge, knowledge of others' minds, the knowledge of suffering, aggregation, cessation, and the path, knowledge of exhaustion, knowledge of non-birth, annihilation, liberation, enhanced virtuous mind, mature good roots, pure and impure liberation, insight into the fruit of stream-entry and its accompanying concentration, skillful entering and leaving, and abiding in meditative absorption.

所謂止觀、三三昧、三明、四念處、四正勤、四如意足、四禪、四無量心、四無色定、四聖道、四聖種、四聖諦、四沙門果、五枝定、五根、五力、五解脫處、六無上法、六聖法、六出要界、六念、六通、七財、七無著法、七三昧、七漏盡力、七覺支、八正道、八勝處、八解脫、八向道迹、九想、九歡喜法、九淨行滿足、九次第定、十賢聖住處、十一切入、十離熾然法、十無學法、十種漏盡力，此名過人法。

These are referred to as tranquility and insight, the three concentrations, the three illuminations, the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of supernatural power, the four absorptions, the four infinite minds, the four formless concentrations, the four noble paths, the four noble seeds, the four noble truths, the four fruits of ascetic practice, the five branches of concentration, the five roots, the five powers, the five kinds of liberation, the six unsurpassed laws, the six holy laws, the six ways of emergence, the six recollections, the six kinds of super-knowledges, the seven treasures, the seven unattachment laws, the seven concentrations, the seven powers of eliminating outflows, the seven factors of enlightenment, the eightfold noble path, the eight superior realms, the eight liberations, the eight modes of engagement, the nine perceptions, the nine joyous laws, the nine complete pure practices, the nine successive concentrations, the ten abodes of the noble saints, the eleven entries, the ten ways of leaving burning passion, the ten non-learning laws, and the ten kinds of powers of eliminating outflows, these are called transcendental ways.



聖知見者，所謂佛及佛弟子所有知見。

The sage's insight refers to the knowledge and insight possessed by the Buddha and his disciples.

或自稱知非見、或自稱見非知、或自稱知見、或非知非見。

One may claim to know without seeing, or to see without knowing, or to have knowledge and insight, or neither know nor see.

知非見者，言：「我知苦習滅道。」

Those who know without seeing say, "I know the noble truths of suffering, its cause, cessation, and the path."

不言：「我天眼清淨，見人死此生彼善趣、惡趣、若貴、若賤。」

They do not say, "My divine eye is pure, and I see beings dying here and being reborn there, in good or bad realms, whether noble or inferior."

不言：「我得天耳過人所聞，人聲、非人聲、若近、若遠。」

They do not say, "I have acquired divine hearing beyond human capability, hearing both human and non-human voices, whether near or far."

又不言：「我知他人心、神足𣣋虛、自識宿命。」

Nor do they say, "I know others' minds, by divine foot travel through the air, or recognize my past lives."

是名知而非見。

These are called those who know without seeing.

見而非知者，自言：「我得天眼清淨乃至自知宿命。」

Those who see without knowing declare, "I have acquired divine vision up to recognizing my past lives."

不言：「我知四真諦。」

They do not say, "I know the four noble truths."

是名見非知。

These are called those who see without knowing.

云何知見？言：「我知四真諦乃至自識宿命。」

What is knowing and seeing? It is saying, "I know the four noble truths up to recognizing my past lives."

是名知見。

This is called knowing and seeing.

云何名非知非見？

What is neither knowing nor seeing?

亦不言：「我知四真諦乃至自識宿命。」

They do not say, "I know the four noble truths up to recognizing my past lives."

是名非知非見。

This is called neither knowing nor seeing.




得殊勝者，如是知、如是見。
Those who attain excellence know and see thus.




實不知言知、不見言見。
To say one understands without knowing or seeing without seeing.

後若撿挍、若不撿挍，撿挍者，
Later on, whether examined or not, if examined,

有人問言：「長老！汝得聖道果耶？
someone might ask, "Elder, have you attained the holy path and its fruits?

從何等法師學得此果？汝何處得？
From which master did you learn and attain this fruit? Where did you attain it?

得時云何？」是名撿挍。
How was it when you attained it?" This is called examination.

不撿挍者，無人問，若問、若不問，
If not examined, no one asks; whether asked or not,

不實自言得過人法，犯波羅夷。
to falsely claim superior attainment on one's own is a Parajika offense.



波羅夷者，四波羅夷中，若一一犯也。
Parajika, among the four Parajikas, should any be violated.




求清淨者，欲得清淨，故言：「我不知言知、不見言見。」
Those who seek purity desire to attain purity, thus they say: "I do not know what I claim to know, nor do I see what I claim to see."

虛者，空也。
Void means emptiness.

誑者，不如實。
To deceive is not truthful.

妄語者，妄自稱說。
A liar claims false words.




除增上慢者，世尊所除。
Eliminate arrogant pride, as the World Honored One does.




波羅夷者如上說。
Parājika is as stated above.

復次波羅夷者，離不妄語退沒墮落，是名波羅夷。
Further, parājika is falling from not abstaining from false speech, this is called parājika.

復次有波羅夷者，所可犯罪不可發露悔過，是名波羅夷。
Further, there is parājika where one commits a crime that cannot be confessed or repented, this is called parājika.

若比丘自言：「我法智耶？」犯越比尼罪。
If a monk says to himself, "Am I knowledgeable of the Dharma?" he commits a pācittiya offense.

若言：「我法智。」偷蘭罪。
If he says, "I am knowledgeable of the Dharma," he commits a thullaccaya offense.

若言：「我得法智。」波羅夷。
If he says, "I have attained Dharma knowledge," it is parājika.

如是斷、如是修、如是作證，如是一一廣說，乃至言：「我漏盡力耶？」得越比尼罪。
Thus, as he concludes, practices, testifies, explains in detail, until he says, "Do I have the power of liberation?" he commits a pācittiya offense.

若言：「我漏盡力。」得偷蘭罪。
If he says, "I have the power of liberation," he commits a thullaccaya offense.

若言：「我得漏盡力。」波羅夷。
If he says, "I have attained the power of liberation," it is parājika.

如是斷、如是修、如是作證亦如是。
Thus, as he concludes, practices, testifies, it is also the same.

若教化比丘至檀越家語女人言：「優婆夷！某處安居比丘盡非凡夫。」得越比尼罪。
If a monk instructs another to go to a donor's house and say to a woman, "Laywoman! The monks in a certain place who reside for the rainy season are all not ordinary people," he commits a pācittiya offense.

若言：「我亦在中。」得偷蘭罪。
If he says, "I am also among them," he commits a thullaccaya offense.

問言：「長老！得是法耶？」答言：「得。」波羅夷。
If asked, "Elder! Have you attained this Dharma?" and he answers, "Yes," it is parājika.

若比丘言：「優婆夷！某處比丘夏安居盡得阿羅漢。」乃至言：「我得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If a monk says, "Laywoman! The monks in a certain place, having completed the summer residence, have all attained Arhatship," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

又比丘言：「某處比丘夏安居盡得妙勝法。」乃至言：「我得是法。」波羅夷。
If furthermore, a monk says, "The monks in a certain place, having completed the summer residence, have all attained superior and excellent Dharma," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

若言：「某處比丘夏安居竟。」亦如是。
If he says, "The monks in a certain place have completed the summer residence," it is the same.

若比丘語優婆塞、優婆夷言：「某處自恣比丘皆非凡夫，皆是阿羅漢、皆得殊勝法。」乃至言：「我得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If a monk says to a layman or laywoman, "The monks in a certain place who observe the self-determined retreat are all not ordinary people, they are Arhats, they have all attained superior Dharma," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

若比丘言：「優婆夷！某處院內住比丘皆非凡夫，皆阿羅漢、得妙勝法。」乃至言：「我得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If a monk says, "Laywoman! The monks residing in a certain courtyard are all not ordinary people, they are Arhats, have attained superior Dharma," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

若比丘語優婆夷言：「某處坐上比丘皆非凡夫，皆是阿羅漢、皆得勝妙法。」乃至問言：「長老得是法耶？」答言：「我亦得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If a monk says to a laywoman, "The monks seated at a particular place are all not ordinary people, they are Arhats, they have all attained superior and excellent Dharma," and if asked, "Elder, have you attained this Dharma?" he responds, "I too have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

大王家、大臣家、長者家、居士家、城中、院中亦如是。
The same applies in the houses of kings, ministers, elders, householders, and within cities and courtyards.

若比丘言：「汝家住比丘、汝家食比丘、為汝家眷屬授經比丘皆非凡夫，是阿羅漢、得勝妙法。」乃至「我得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If a monk says, "The monks residing in your house, eating at your house, teaching the Dharma to your family members are all not ordinary people; they are Arhats, have attained superior Dharma," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

若言：「持如是鉢、著如是衣、食如是食、如是行、如是住、如是臥皆非凡夫，皆是阿羅漢、得勝妙法。」乃至「自得是法。」犯波羅夷。
If he says, "Those who carry such a bowl, wear such robes, eat such food, practice thus, live thus, sleep thus are all not ordinary people, they are Arhats, have attained superior Dharma," and says, "I have attained this Dharma," it is parājika.

若言：「是上諸比丘皆得法智。」自言：「我法智耶？」得越比尼罪。
If he says, "All those higher monks have attained Dharma knowledge," and says to himself, "Am I knowledgeable of the Dharma?" he commits a pācittiya offense.

「我法智。」偷蘭罪。
"I am knowledgeable of the Dharma," is a thullaccaya offense.

若言：「我得法智證不實。」波羅夷。
If he says, "I have attained Dharma knowledge that is untrue," it is parājika.

如是知、如是斷、如是修、如是證，乃至漏盡力作證，亦如是。
Thus he knows, concludes, practices, testifies, including attesting to the power of liberation, it is also so.

若比丘以中國語向邊地說、若以邊地語向中國說、若中國語向中國說、若邊地語向邊地說、若說義不說味，得偷蘭罪。
If a monk uses the language of China to speak in border regions, or uses the language of border regions to speak in China, or uses the language of China in China, or the language of border regions in border regions, if he speaks the meaning but not the flavor, he commits a thullaccaya offense.

若說味不說義，越比尼罪。
If he speaks the flavor but not the meaning, it is a pācittiya offense.

若說味說義，得波羅夷。
If he speaks both flavor and meaning, it is parājika.

若不說義不說味，得越比尼罪。
If he speaks neither meaning nor flavor, it is a pācittiya offense.

說義不說味者，自稱說我、不稱說羅漢。
To speak meaning but not flavor is to claim oneself as a speaker, not claiming Arhatship.

說味不說義者，稱說羅漢、不自稱說我。
To speak flavor but not meaning is to claim Arhatship, not claiming oneself as a speaker.

說義說味者，自稱說我是羅漢。
To speak meaning and flavor is to claim oneself as an Arhat.

不說義不說味者，作羅漢相、或合眼以手自指，語優婆夷言：「汝愚癡人不知其尊，譬如優曇鉢花時時一出而不知貴。」
To speak neither meaning nor flavor is to act as an Arhat, to close the eyes and point at oneself, saying to a laywoman, "You foolish person, you do not recognize greatness, like the rare blooming of the udumbara flower not recognized as precious."

作如是相者得越比尼罪。
To act in such a manner commits a pācittiya offense.

比丘若作書印、若作手相，現義不現味者，得越比尼罪。
If a monk writes or makes a stamp or hand gesture, showing the meaning but not the flavor, he commits a pācittiya offense.

現味不現義者，越比尼心悔。
If he shows flavor but not meaning, it is a mental pācittiya offense.

現義現味，得偷蘭罪。
If he shows both meaning and flavor, it is a thullaccaya offense.

不現義不現味，無罪。
If he shows neither meaning nor flavor, there is no offense.

除根力覺道種，乃至世間善法，小小威儀不應讚歎，但讚歎佛法僧大弟子舍利弗、目連無罪，不得自讚歎自身，唯有同意問說，實者無罪。
Except for roots of power, feelings, path seeds, even worldly good dharmas, small observances should not be praised, but praising the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, and great disciples such as Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana is blameless; one should not praise oneself, only if there is mutual understanding and it is true, it is without blame.

是故說：「若比丘未知未了，自稱得過人法、聖知見殊勝，如是知、如是見。後於異時若撿挍、若不撿挍，犯罪欲求清淨故作如是言：『長老！我不知言知、不見言見，空誑不實語。』除增上慢，是比丘得波羅夷，不應共住。」
Therefore it is said: "If a monk, without knowing or realizing, claims to have attained surpassing human dharmas, or superior knowledge and vision, knowing thus and seeing thus, and later at another time, through self-examination or lack thereof, offends and seeks purity, therefore says, 'Elder! I did not know though claimed knowing, did not see though claimed seeing, falsely and untruthfully.' Except for intensified arrogance, this monk incurs parājika, and should not live together."



世尊於舍衛城，成佛六年冬分第四半月十三日，

The World-Honored One was in the city of Sravasti, on the thirteenth day of the fourth half-month of winter in the sixth year since his enlightenment,

食後東向坐三人半影，

After eating, he sat facing east with a shadow of three and a half people,

為聚落中眾多比丘制此戒，

and made this precept for the many monks in the settlement,

及增上慢比丘。

and for the monks with heightened arrogance.

已制當隨順行，是名隨順法。

Once established, it should be followed accordingly; this is called the law of compliance.

(妄語戒竟)

(The precept against lying is concluded)




摩訶僧祇律卷第四  
The Fourth Volume of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya  




