inly! Please provide the text that you need translated


大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
Taishō Tripiṭaka, Volume 22, No. 1425, Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya




版本記錄

Version History

發行日期：2024-08

Release Date: August 2024

最後更新：2024-07-12

Last Updated: July 12, 2024




【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

[Editorial Note] This database is edited by the Buddhist Electronic Text Association Foundation (CBETA) based on the "Taisho Tripitaka."




蕭鎮國大德提供，

Provided by the virtue of Xiao Zhen Guo,

伽耶山基金會提供，

Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation,

北美某大德提供，

Provided by a certain virtuous person in North America,

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided with new punctuation by Master Shi Ben Chan.




【其他事項】

Additional Matters

本資料庫可自由免費流通，

This database can be freely circulated at no cost,

詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

For detailed content, please refer to the "Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Digital Text Foundation",




appy to help with your request, but it seems like you've marked a section with a line of dashes that typically indicates the beginning of content you want translated. Please provide the lines you would like translated, and I'll be able to assist you further


摩訶僧祇律卷第十六東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
The Sixteenth Scroll of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, translated by the Tripiṭaka Bhikshu Buddhabhadra and Faxian during the Eastern Jin period.




明單提九十二事法之五  
Ming's list on the ninety-two matters of law - Number five  




，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti and spoke at length as mentioned above.

時有比丘在聚落中安居竟，來向舍衛城，欲禮覲世尊。
At that time, a monk who had just completed his retreat in the village was coming to Shravasti, wishing to pay respect to the Blessed One.

時有居士在聚落中作福舍，施四方僧一食。
There was a layperson in the village who set up a place for offering a meal to monks from all directions as an act of merit.

此比丘來，居士見已，歡喜言：「善來大德！」
This monk arrived, and the layperson, upon seeing him, happily said, "Welcome, Venerable!"

即敷床褥與水洗脚、給塗足油及非時飲、夜燃燈明敷置臥具，安隱令寢。
He then prepared a bed with bedding, provided water for washing the feet, gave oil for the feet, non-mealtime drinks, and at night lit a lamp and arranged a sleeping place, allowing him to sleep peacefully.

晨起又給楊枝淨水，施以適身美食。
In the morning, he again provided a toothstick and clean water, offering him wholesome and suitable food.

比丘食已，便作是念：「我遠來飢乏，今日得如是適身飲食，且可小停消息四大，然後當往奉覲世尊！」
After the monk had eaten, he thought, "I have come from a distance, hungry and lacking, and today I have received such suitable food and drink. I can stay a while to balance the four elements in my body, and then I will go to see the Blessed One!"

如是念已，晝在阿練若處住，暮則還舍。
Thinking thus, he stayed in a secluded place during the day and returned to the house in the evening.

檀越見之，如前歡喜，如是乃至三日。
Seeing this, the layperson was happy as before, and this continued for three days.

檀越問言：「大德！今日在何處食？」
The layperson asked, "Venerable, where do you eat today?"

答言：「此間。」
He replied, "Here."

又問：「昨日何處？」
The layperson further asked, "Where did you eat yesterday?"

亦言：「此間。」
He also replied, "Here."

又問：「先日何處？」
The layperson asked again, "Where did you eat the day before yesterday?"

又言：「此間。」
He replied again, "Here."

檀越嫌言：「我家窮儉，自力於此為四方僧作一食施處，大德不應久停。」
The layperson, feeling discontent, said, "My family is humble and frugal. We provide this one meal for monks from all directions through our own efforts. The Venerable shouldn't stay for long."

若我家豐饒，當自恣施一切僧。
If my family were prosperous, I would offer freely to all monks.

比丘念言：「檀越出此恨聲，我自當去。」
The monk thought, "The layperson has spoken in discontent; I should leave on my own."

於是漸行前至佛所，稽首禮足，却住一面，佛知而故問：「汝在何處安居？」
So he gradually proceeded to the Buddha's place, paid obeisance and stood aside, and the Buddha knowingly asked, "Where did you spend your retreat?"

答言：「在某聚落。」
He replied, "In such-and-such village."

「發來幾時？」
"When did you set out?"

答言：「爾許。」
He replied, "This long."

時佛問比丘：「有何因緣道里不遠，來日經久？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "What is the reason that, though the journey is not far, it took you so long to come?"

比丘即以上事具白世尊。
The monk then fully explained the above matters to the Blessed One.

佛言：「此事不可。汝云何以身口故，為檀越所嫌？」
The Buddha said, "This is not appropriate. Why were you disdained by the layperson because of your conduct?"

從今日施一食處，比丘不得過一食。
From today, in a place where one meal is offered, monks should not take more than one meal


衛城，爾時有比丘在聚落中夏安居訖，來詣舍衛，欲禮覲世尊。  
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, and at that time a monk who had stayed during the summer retreat in a village wished to visit Śrāvastī to pay respects to the World-honored One.  

時有檀越，在聚落中作福舍，施四方僧一食。  
At that time, there was a benefactor in the village who created a charitable hall, offering a meal to the monks from all directions.  

是比丘行過此舍，供給所須，如前所說。  
The monk passed by this hall, received what was necessary, as previously said.  

比丘食已而出，風病發動，自念：「我不能行，世尊制戒施一食處不聽過一食。我今且住，但不受其食。」  
After the monk ate and left, he was afflicted by a disorder and thought to himself, "I cannot proceed, as the World-honored One prescribes a rule that forbids receiving more than one meal in the same location. I will stay here but not receive their meal."  

念已即還入舍，檀越如初供給所須，比丘不受。  
With this thought, he re-entered the hall, and the benefactor provided necessities as before, but the monk did not accept.  

至明日復與前食，亦復不受，於是即去，心念：「我到某村，當乞食。」  
The next day, he was again offered the previous meal, but he still did not accept and decided to leave, thinking, "I will reach a certain village and beg for food."  

比丘至聚落，日時已過，即便失食，四大飢羸，至世尊所，稽首禮足，却住一面。  
The monk reached the village, but it was past the time for receiving alms, and he missed the meal, becoming weak and hungry. He went to the World-honored One, worshipped at his feet, and stood to one side.  

佛知而故問，即以上事，具白世尊。  
The Buddha, knowing this, asked him intentionally, and the monk reported the matter fully to the World-honored One.  

佛言：「善哉！善哉！比丘汝隨順正法信心出家，少欲順行不為命故，世尊制戒護而不犯。」  
The Buddha said, "Well done! Well done! Monk, you have renounced with faith in accordance with the true teaching, living with fewer desires and maintaining the rules prescribed by the World-honored One without transgression."  

佛言：「從今已後福德舍中，若病比丘，聽過一食。」  
The Buddha said, "From now on, in a charitable hall, if a monk is ill, he is allowed to receive more than one meal."  

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。若比丘施一食處，不病比丘應一食。若過一食者，波夜提。」  
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in Śrāvastī shall gather, as I will prescribe rules for the benefit of all monks. Those who have already heard should listen again. If a place offers one meal, a monk who is not ill should only receive one meal. Exceeding this will lead to a Pāyattika offense."  




比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as described above.




施一食處者，世尊所聽。
Giving a single meal is approved by the World-Honored One.




食者，五種食，如上說。
Food means the five types of food mentioned above.




不病者，身無疾患。
For one who is not ill, their body is without affliction.

身有疾患不能進路，住食無罪。
If one's body has an illness and cannot proceed on the path, staying and eating is not an offense.

若不病過一食者，波夜提。
If not ill, but they miss one meal, it is a breach of the precept (Pācittiya).




波夜提者，如上說。

Prajñā is explained as above.




一間中，一家施一食處，若在我屋中宿者，我當與食。
If in a series of sixteen houses, one household provides a meal, and if someone stays in my house, I will provide food.

若比丘為僧事、為塔事、自為事到一間中宿，一食已欲料理事，事不了者，應到第二間中，宿食已當去。
If a monk stays for a monastery matter, or a pagoda matter, or personal reason in one house, he should take a meal and attend to the matter. If not resolved, he should go to the second house and after receiving another meal, move on.

若事復不了者，乃至十六間中宿食已，事訖當去。
If the matter is still unresolved, he can continue staying and eating in these houses up to sixteen houses until the matter is settled.

若復不了，不得更食，當乞食。
If it still cannot be resolved, he should not eat further and must beg for his meals.

乞食時當餘處乞，不得還從其家乞。
When begging for food, he should do so from other places, but should not beg again from the same household.

若復本作舍時，同村相助者，亦不得從乞。
If initially the villagers helped in building the house, he should not beg from them either.

當往餘村中乞食已，當即彼村中宿，宿已更來料理事。
He should beg for food in another village and stay there, and then return to settle the matter.

若事不了，復得如上十六間中食。
If the matter is unresolved, he may eat and stay as previously explained in the sixteen houses.

若事不了者，復離去，隔一宿已，復來得食料理事。
If unresolved, he should leave again after a night's rest, and return later to deal with the matter.

若彼家遣女迎婦入新舍，作如是言：「我遣使往請師，猶恐難得，何況今見而欲去！
If the household sends a girl to welcome a woman to the new house, saying: "I sent someone to invite the teacher, fearing it would be difficult to find one, yet now seeing him wanting to leave!

比丘爾時受請食者，無罪。
If at that time a monk accepts an invitation to eat, it is not a fault.

是故說。
Thus it is explained.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in Śrāvastī and expounded widely as above.

爾時僧園民年年穀麥新熟時，供僧食。
At that time, when the grains in the monastery garden were newly harvested each year, the residents would offer food to the monks.

云何年年新熟？
How is it newly harvested each year?

稻熟時、麥熟時、豆熟時、蘇油石蜜時，各取少許分置一處，擬供眾僧。
When the rice, wheat, beans, butter, or honey are ripe, a small portion is taken and set aside to be offered to the monks.

時園民語比丘言：「我當年年新穀熟時，施僧食。
At that time, the residents said to the monks, "Every year, when the new grains are ripe, I will offer food to the monks.

若祇洹無人供日，唯願見語，我當設供，令僧自恣飽滿。」 
If there is no one offering food at Jetavana on a certain day, please let me know, I will make arrangements to ensure the monks are fully satisfied."

爾時諸居士信心供養種種飲食，前食、後食少有缺日，  
At that time, the laypeople faithfully provided various foods, and there were few days lacking offerings for both morning and afternoon meals,

中間遇有一空日，便往語言：「長壽！
If a day without offerings occasionally occurred, they went and said, "Elder!

明日祇洹無供，汝先欲設供，今可及時。」 
There will be no offerings at Jetavana tomorrow, if you wish to make an offering, you can do so now."

園民聞已，即詣祇洹頭面禮僧足，右膝著地，合掌白言：
Upon hearing this, the resident went to Jetavana, bowed at the monks' feet, placed his right knee on the ground, and with joined palms said:

「我園民某甲明日設供，請一切僧，唯願受請。」 
"I, the resident, so-and-so, will make offerings tomorrow and invite all monks, I hope you will accept my invitation."

僧即受請。
The monks accepted the invitation.

爾時有長者，用舊錢五百，買得二牛，得已欲試看，
At that time, a wealthy elder used five hundred old coins to buy two oxen and wanted to try them out.

駕著車中打走，往返一由延。
He hitched them to a cart and drove a yojana back and forth.

車鞅急故，一牛即死。
Due to the tight yoke, one of the oxen died.

便大憂惱，苦住不樂：「云何貴價買牛未用便死？」 
He became very distressed and unhappy: "How could the costly ox die before being used?"

有知識居士語言：「汝何故不樂如是？」 
An acquaintance asked him, "Why are you so unhappy?"

居士具說上事，即語言：「汝何以不作堅法？」 
The elder explained the above situation, and he said, "Why don't you perform a steadfast (charitable) act?"

問云：「何堅法？」 
He asked, "What is a steadfast act?"

答言：「堅法者，汝往詣祇洹，請僧持此肉供飯眾僧。」
He replied, "A steadfast act is to go to Jetavana, invite the monks, and use this meat to offer food to the congregation."

彼人聞已，即到祇洹，入僧中頭面禮僧足，胡跪合掌，作如是言：
Upon hearing this, the person went to Jetavana, entered the assembly of monks, bowed at their feet, knelt with joined palms, and said:

「我某甲明日請僧薄設微供，願受我請。」 
"I, so-and-so, invite the monks tomorrow to a modest offering, and hope you will accept."

有舊知識比丘，即往語言：「汝不解請法，何不先語我？我當教汝請僧。」 
An acquaintance among the monks approached him and said, "You don’t understand the invitation method, why didn't you discuss with me first? I could guide you in inviting the monks."

彼即答言：「阿闍梨！我五百舊錢買得二牛，一牛已死。
He replied, "Teacher! I used five hundred old coins to buy two oxen, and one of them has died.

我今欲以此牛肉作堅法。」
I now want to use this ox's meat to perform a steadfast act."

比丘言：「僧已受人請。」 
The monk said, "The monks have already accepted an invitation."

檀越言：「我已作食，今當云何？」 
The elder said, "I have already prepared the food, what should I do now?"

知識比丘言：「我今教汝，更往白眾僧：『我請僧明日前食。』 
The knowledgeable monk said, "I will guide you now, go again and tell the monks: 'I invite the monks for a morning meal tomorrow.'

若問汝：『作何等前食？』汝當答言：『作麥飯肉段。』」 
If they ask you, 'What kind of morning meal?' you should reply, 'Wheat rice with meat.'"

教已即往到僧所，頭面禮足，胡跪合掌，作如是言：「我某甲請僧，明日設前食，願受我請。」
After instruction, he immediately went to the monks, bowed at their feet, knelt with joined palms, and said: "I, so-and-so, invite the monks, and will prepare a morning meal tomorrow, please accept my invitation."

比丘問言：「汝作何等前食？」 
The monk asked, "What kind of morning meal will you prepare?"

答言：「作麥飯肉段。」 
He replied, "Wheat rice with meat."

語言：「長壽！汝明日清旦早辦。」 
The monk said, "Elder! Prepare it early tomorrow morning."

答言：「爾！願諸尊者，明旦早來。」 
He replied, "Yes! I hope all the venerable ones will come early tomorrow morning."

即便還家，通夜煮肉作種種飲食。 
He immediately returned home and spent the entire night cooking the meat and preparing various dishes.

清旦敷置床褥，漉淨水已，往白僧時到，僧著衣持鉢來到其家。
In the morning, he arranged the seats and filtered clean water. When the time came, the monks, dressed and holding alms bowls, arrived at his home.

次第坐已，檀越自下種種美食，自恣飽滿，即還精舍。  
After they sat in order, the elder personally served them various delicious foods, allowing them to eat to their satisfaction, and then returned to the monastery.

園民作是念：「阿闍梨是一食人，當須早食。」
The resident thought, "The teacher eats only once a day, thus needs to eat early."

通夜辦具種種飲食，敷置床褥，漉淨水已。
He prepared various dishes throughout the night, arranged seating, and filtered clean water.

往到祇洹，頭面禮僧足，胡跪合掌白言：「時到。」
He then went to Jetavana, bowed at the monks' feet, knelt with joined palms, and said, "The time has come."

爾時諸比丘以前食飽滿故，雖見請至，猶如不聞。 
At that time, because the monks were already satiated from the earlier meal, although they heard the invitation, they acted as if they did not.

時園民念言：「甚奇！甚奇！諸阿闍梨是一食人法，應飢想。
The resident thought: "How strange! How strange! The teachers, following the one-meal-a-day practice, should feel hunger.

今聞請食，猶如不聞。若外道聞請食者，便捉三奇杖軍持，在前而去。」 
Yet now they hear the invitation and act as if they don't. If those outsiders heard the invitation to a meal, they would already be gripping their walking staffs and moving forward."

如是第二、第三讚歎已，諸比丘方起，仿佯大小行，嚬伸緩帶威儀，安詳往到其舍，
After praising them again and again like this, the monks finally rose, strolled around leisurely maintaining dignified demeanor, and calmly went to his house.

次第坐已，園民手自下食，滿杓而與，上座舉手現少著相。
After they sat in order, the resident personally served the food with a full spoon, and the senior monk raised his hand showing only a little portion left.

園民復作是言：「諸阿闍梨是一食人，於此種種食中都無貪想。」 
The resident then said, "The teachers, who eat only one meal a day, show no greed despite all this delicious food."

園民作是念：「若上座食少，下座應食多。」 
The resident thought, "If the senior monk eats less, the junior monk should eat more."

如是第二、第三，乃至年少，復作是言：「阿闍梨是一食人，於此飲食都無貪想。」 
For the second, third, and even the junior monks, he said again, "The teachers, who eat just one meal, have no greed for this food."

爾時下座中有一晚學摩訶羅，作如是言：「我等今日不為食來，為汝意故來，我等已於餘處飽食竟。
At that time, among the junior monks, a young novice Maha Ra said, "We did not come today for food, but for your intention. We have already eaten well elsewhere.

汝若不信者，看我脚上肉汁。」 
If you do not believe, look at the meat sauce on my feet."

園民聞已，心中不悅，即棄食器置地而嫌恨言：「諸阿闍梨先受我請，云何復於餘處而食？」
Upon hearing this, the resident was displeased, he put down the food vessels on the ground and said with resentment, "The teachers first accepted my invitation, how could they eat elsewhere?"

心嫌不止，即往佛所，頭面禮足，却住一面，白佛言：「云何諸比丘先受我請，而於餘處食？」
His resentment did not stop, so he went to the Buddha, bowed at his feet, stood aside, and said, "How is it the monks accepted my invitation first but ate elsewhere?"

佛即為園民隨順說法，示教利喜已，即白佛言：「世尊！我供僧餘食當置何處？」
The Buddha then taught the Dharma in accordance with the resident's needs, gave guidance to benefit his joy, and the resident asked, "World-Honored One! Where should I place the remaining food offered to the monks?"

佛言：「汝到某甲池上淨掃治地，持食置彼。
The Buddha said, "You should go to the certain pond, clean and prepare the ground, and place the food there.

波斯匿王與彌尼剎利共鬪不如，軍今退還，當於彼住，汝可以此食上之。」
King Prasenajit is engaged in battle with the Mallas and will retreat. When they settle there, you can present this food."

王來入池洗浴更著新衣，即持向者種種飲食，奉獻大王并及將士。
When the king arrived at the pond for a bath, changed into new robes, and received the various foods, he offered them to the great king and the soldiers.

於飢渴中來，得是種種飲食，皆大歡喜，勅令賞賜種種珍寶，園民現得善利喜慶無量。
Coming in thirst and hunger, they received these various foods with great joy and ordered a reward of various jewels, allowing the resident to gain immeasurable benefits and joy.

佛言：「呼彼食比丘來。」 
The Buddha said, "Call that eating monk here."

即呼來已，佛問比丘：「汝云何先受人請，而於餘處食？
After calling him, the Buddha asked the monk, "How did you first accept an invitation yet eat elsewhere?

比丘汝不知耶？如人所事宅神樹神，若欲餘行，先當食主人食已，然後餘行。
Monk, do you not understand? Just as a person serves household gods or tree deities, one should first eat the host's food before engaging in other activities.

汝等不隨順行，先受人請而於餘處食，從今以後不聽處處食。」
You have not followed this practice, accepting an invitation first and then eating elsewhere. From now on, you are not permitted to eat in multiple places."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Moreover, the Buddha resided in the city of Sravasti and spoke extensively as above.

世尊五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見有病比丘，佛知而故問：
For the sake of five benefits, the World-Honored One would visit the monks' quarters every five days, and seeing a sick monk, the Buddha knowingly asked:

「比丘！汝所患何等，今為增損？」
"Monk! What is your ailment, and has it improved or worsened now?"

答言：「我患苦無損，我先得數數食時，身得安樂。
The monk replied, "My suffering has not lessened, and when I previously received frequent meals, my body was at ease.

世尊制戒不得數數食故，我病不損。」
Due to the rule set by the World-Honored One against frequent meals, my illness has not improved."

佛言：「從今日聽病時數數食。」
The Buddha said, "From today, you are permitted to have frequent meals when ill."




衛城，毘舍佉鹿母年年請僧飯食施衣。
Moreover, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, Visakha, the mother of a deer, invited monks for meals and offered robes every year.

時祇洹精舍有六十病比丘，來到其家，毘舍佉鹿母言：「阿闍梨！祇洹精舍有五百眾僧，今有何因緣，正有六十比丘來？」
At that time, there were sixty sick monks from Jetavana Monastery who came to her home. Visakha, the mother of a deer, said, "Venerables! There are five hundred monks at Jetavana Monastery. For what reason have only sixty monks come?"

諸比丘語優婆夷言：「世尊制戒不得處處食，唯聽病者，是故諸病比丘來。」
The monks told the laywoman, "The Blessed One has established a rule that we cannot eat everywhere, except for the sick. Therefore, these sick monks have come."

毘舍佉鹿母言：「阿闍梨！世人正以請食為限。若食我食者，我當施衣。若不食者我不施衣。」
Visakha, the mother of a deer, said, "Venerables! People generally set limits when inviting for meals. If they eat my food, I will offer robes. If they do not eat, I will not offer robes."

阿闍梨！此施衣時可往白佛，或有開聽。
Venerables! At the time of offering robes, you may report to the Buddha, and perhaps there will be permission.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛告諸比丘：「毘舍佉鹿母是黠慧聰明，從今日聽施衣時。」
Because of this reason, the monks reported to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said to the monks, "Visakha, the mother of a deer, is wise and intelligent. From today onwards, she is permitted to offer robes.


復次佛住舍衛城，爾時眾人勸化欲設大會，供養飯食九十六種出家人。
Moreover, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, and at that time people were encouraged to convene a great assembly to offer meals to ninety-six monks.

有至優婆塞所勸化索物者，優婆塞言：「我欲作要，若使我諸師作上座者，當與汝物。」
There were those who went to the lay disciples to solicit items, and the laymen said, "I wish to make a proposition: if our teachers can sit as the chief among the seats, I will give you the items."

勸化人言：「汝聽若有信向外道者，亦作是言：『若使我諸師作上座者，當與汝物。』
The solicitor said, "Do you agree that if there are those who believe in the outside doctrines, they will also say, ‘If our teachers are to sit as the chief, we will give you the items?’

我當云何得人人許其上座？汝但與我物，我當某月某日在阿耆河岸上，莊嚴其處施竪幢幡，行列寶樹間，敷妙座細軟快樂，設供餚饍，作斯大會。」
How shall anyone agree to the chief seat? You just give me the items, and on a certain month and day, I will decorate a place on the bank of the Ajī River, set up flags and posts among rows of jewel trees, lay out wonderful seats that are soft and comfortable, arrange a feast, and hold this great assembly."

諸出家人中有先至者，即為上座。」
Among the monks, whoever arrives first will be the chief seat."

諸優婆塞以佛僧是良福田故，即便與物。
The laypeople, considering the Buddhist monks to be a good field of merit, immediately gave the items.

與物已，往尊者阿難所，頭面禮足具白上事：「尊者！當以何方便，令諸比丘得為上座，使外道恥辱？」
After giving the items, they went to the Venerable Ananda, prostrated, and reported, "Venerable sir, by what means can the monks become the chief seats and cause the outsiders to be shamed?"

尊者阿難即往佛所，頭面禮足，却住一面，以上因緣具白世尊。
The Venerable Ananda immediately went to the Buddha, prostrated, and stood to one side, reporting the entire matter to the Blessed One.

諸勸化人辦具食已，請九十六種諸出家人，復請波斯匿王及群臣太子，諸聚落主、宿舊長者并薩薄主，至於某時，皆詣阿耆河上大會處，受我供食。
The solicitors prepared the food, invited ninety-six monks, the King Prasenajit and his ministers, crown princes, chiefs of villages, elders, and masters to the great assembly at the Ajī River bank to partake in the meal.

先前一日，佛告目連：「宜知是時。」
The day before, the Buddha told Maudgalyāyana, "Be aware of the time."

尊者目連即以神足，使河水瀑漲泡沫彌岸，諸外道各作是言：「我當先渡，取第一坐處。」
The Venerable Maudgalyāyana used his miraculous power to make the river swell with waves and foam, and the outsiders each said, "I must cross first to take the chief seat."

諸外道各各通夜競縛𤀥栰，皆欲先渡，而水激急，適欲渡岸，還復漂還。
The outsiders tied rafts throughout the night, all wanting to cross first, but the water surged violently, and those trying to cross were carried back.

竟夜疲苦𤀥栰散壞，沒溺寒凍，在於岸邊，向日而蹲，乃至食時無能渡者。
Exhausted by the night's efforts, the rafts broke apart, leaving them cold and soaked, squatting on the riverbank until mealtime without anyone able to cross.

爾時祇洹精舍有人供僧，佛住待時。
At that time, in the Jeta Grove Monastery, someone prepared offerings for the monks, and the Buddha waited for the right time.

諸比丘中有年少者，皆作是言：「世尊今出何乃太晚？恐諸外道得上座處。」
Among the monks, the younger ones said, "Why does the Blessed One come out so late today? We worry that the outsiders might take the chief seat."

爾時世尊時到，著衣持鉢威儀庠序，與大眾俱詣河上。
Then, when the time was right, the Blessed One, dressed appropriately and holding his bowl, proceeded with the great assembly to the riverbank.

諸外道見已，各相謂言：「我等竟夜造諸方便，如是苦惱無能渡者。此剃髮沙門，當云何渡？」
When the outsiders saw this, they said to each other, "We spent the entire night trying various means and failed to cross. How will these shaven-headed monks cross?"

爾時佛告目連：「汝自知時，使諸比丘得安隱渡。」
Then the Buddha told Maudgalyāyana, "You know the time, make it so the monks can cross peacefully."

爾時目連即以神力，造作七寶橋，種種雜寶以為欄楯，上施寶縵七寶絞絡，羅覆其上，雨眾名花，作眾伎樂，燒眾名香，香烟如雲。
At that time, Maudgalyāyana used his divine power to create a bridge of seven treasures, with a variety of ornamental jewels for railings, precious covers woven with the seven treasures, raining down famous flowers, playing diverse music, and burning famous incense with fragrance like clouds.

諸外道見是橋已，皆大歡喜，各作是言：「此諸沙門徐徐而來，我等當先渡，取第一坐處。」
When the outsiders saw the bridge, they were overjoyed and said, "These monks are coming slowly; we should cross first to secure the chief seat."

即皆奔走競抄趣橋，各欲先渡。足蹈橋上，皆悉墮水。
They all rushed and scrambled for the bridge, each wanting to cross first. The moment they stepped on the bridge, they all fell into the water.

諸外道服飾三奇杖軍持等物，皆落水中隨流而去；佛神力故，令無死者。
The outsiders' attire, staffs, military gear, and other items fell into the water and drifted away, but due to the Buddha's divine power, none of them perished.

於是世尊與諸比丘威儀庠序儼然而進。
Thus, the Blessed One, with the monks, proceeded with dignity and order.

佛最在前，諸比丘次第而行，目連最後，隨進步處寶橋即滅。
The Buddha led in front, the monks followed in sequence, and Maudgalyāyana was at the end; as they advanced, the jewel bridge vanished.

佛與諸比丘渡已，佛告目連：「汝可使河還復如故，諸外道等各各方便乘𤀥栰渡。」
After crossing, the Buddha said to Maudgalyāyana, "You may return the river to its original state, so the outsiders may cross using their means."

佛既渡已，一切迴身而說偈言：
After crossing, the Buddha turned and recited a verse:




先渡此岸眾，
First ferry those on this shore,

已渡生死海；
Already crossed the sea of life and death;




不為世流漂，
Not to be swayed by worldly currents,

正智渡彼岸。」
To cross to the other shore with true wisdom.




安詳就坐，諸比丘亦次第坐，諸外道後渡，在比丘下行而坐。

The Buddha recited the verses and sat peacefully, and the monks also took their seats in sequence, while the outsiders sat behind them.

爾時檀越手自斟酌種種飲食，供養世尊及弟子眾。

At that time, the patron personally served various food and drink offerings to the World-Honored One and his disciples.

爾時諸比丘心疑：「世尊制戒不得處處食，我等云何當復得食？」

At that moment, the monks were doubtful, thinking, "The World-Honored One has established a rule against eating everywhere; how can we have our meal now?"

即起白佛，佛言：「聽作施食法。」

They immediately stood up to ask the Buddha, and the Buddha replied, "Allow the practice of offering food."

應作如是言：「我今日得食，施與某甲比丘乃至沙彌尼，彼於我不計，我當食。」

It should be said like this: "I have received food today, which I offer to such-and-such monk or even a novice nun; they do not account for me, and thus I will eat."

如是三說。

Repeat this statement three times.

爾時檀越各各念言：「誰應呪願？」或有言：「尼乾子。」或言：「不蘭迦葉。」

Then the patrons each thought, "Who should make the blessing?" Some said, "The Nigantha," while others said, "Purana Kassapa."

如是外道等各云：「應呪願。」

The outsiders each expressed their views, saying, "They should make the blessing."

爾時有多人言：「沙門瞿曇上座，法應呪願。」

At that time, many people said, "Venerable Gautama, the ascetic, should make the blessing according to the Dharma."

爾時世尊在九十六種道中，不自高顯、不輕他人，隨順呪願。

At that time, the World-Honored One, amidst the ninety-six kinds of paths, did not exalt himself nor belittle others but made the blessing accordingly.

如《生經》中廣說。

As is extensively explained in the "Birth Sutra."

爾時世尊復廣為眾人隨順說法，示教利喜，歡喜而去。

Then the World-Honored One further expounded the Dharma for the people, instructing them for benefit and joy, and they departed happily.

佛還祇洹，告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」

The Buddha returned to Jetavana and told the monks, "Have all those residing in the city of Sravasti gather. For ten benefits, I will establish rules for the monks, and those who have already heard them should hear them again."

若比丘處處食，除餘時，波夜提。

If a monk eats everywhere except during special occasions, it is an offense.

餘時者，病時、衣時，是名餘時。

Special occasions refer to times of illness or when dealing with clothing; these are called special occasions.


比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as previously mentioned.




處處食者，數數食。
Those who eat everywhere, eat frequently.




除餘時者，病時。
Except for other times, it is time of illness.

病者，熱病風冷，如是等病，若食已更食，身得安隱，食者無罪。
For those who are ill, with diseases like fever, wind, or cold, if they eat again after eating, the body will find comfort, and there is no blame for eating.



衣時者

At the time of robes

無迦絺那衣一月

For one month without the Kathina robe

有迦絺那衣五月

For five months with the Kathina robe

彼衣中間得捨五戒無罪：

In the interim period of these robes, one may abandon five precepts without fault:

所謂別眾食、處處食

Namely, eating separately from the group, eating anywhere

不白離同食處、畜長衣、離衣宿。

Not declaring before leaving the shared eating place, storing long robes, staying overnight without robes.



餘時者，世尊說無罪。
At that time, the World-Honored One declared there was no fault.




波夜提者，如上說。
As mentioned above, Bo Ye Ti.




日數應施食，知臘數憶所受持衣，別眾食病不病。

Monks should know the days to offer food, remember the number of years since ordination and maintain their robes, distinguish between shared meals and meals for the sick or healthy.

若人問：「今日幾？」不得逆問：「昨日是幾日？」當知月一日、二日，乃至十四、十五日、月大、月小悉應知。

If someone asks, "What day is it today?" you must not ask in return, "What day was it yesterday?" You should know the first day of the month, the second day, up to the fourteenth, fifteenth, as well as whether the month is long or short.

比丘清旦當作施食念：「今日得食施某甲，某甲於我不計，我當食。」如是三說。

In the morning, monks should think to offer food, saying, "Today food is offered to such a one, and such a one does not mind me, I will eat." Repeat this three times.

日日自憶，若干臘數。

Every day, remember the number of years since ordination.

當憶受持三衣及不受作淨施者，念別眾食。

You should remember to maintain the three robes and not receive offerings from those who don't purify gifts, and to think about shared meals.

若病、若不病，齊幾名為比丘食？

Whether sick or not sick, what is considered the minimum for a monk's meal?

若麥飯三鉢他邏，若麨二鉢他邏、若一鉢他邏，米作飯魚肉，若一鉢、若半鉢，是中若得一一，是名比丘食。

If there are three bowls of barley food, or two or one bowl of flour cereal, or a bowl of rice with fish or meat, or even half a bowl, any of these is considered a monk's meal.

若僧伽藍中作食，食未熟，若比丘受麨，作麨漿飲，犯處處食，得波夜提。

If food is being prepared in a monastery and is not yet ready, and the monk takes flour to make a drink, consuming it is considered eating here and there, leading to an offence.

若作施食法、若病，不犯。

If practicing the food offering method or sick, it is not an offence.

若衣時者，二俱不犯。

If it is during robe-wearing time, both are not offences.

若外有請家者，即名比丘食。

If there is an invitation from outside, it is considered a monk's meal.

比丘爾時倩人迎食，迎食未至，比丘若受麨作麨漿送食至，送食比丘若知戒相者，應小住。

At that time, if a monk invites someone for food and the food has not arrived yet, and he takes flour to make a drink, if the person delivering the food to the monk knows the precepts, they should pause for a moment.

待彼比丘作施食法己，然後授食。

Wait until the monk performs the food offering practice before giving the food.

若送食比丘不知戒相，便疾授食，不容作施食法者，比丘爾時口中有食，應含食說施食法，以輕貿重故。

If the food-bringing monk does not know the precepts and hastily gives the food without allowing the food offering practice, and the monk has food in their mouth, they should perform the food offering practice even if it’s burdensome to do so lightly.

若比丘到一家，檀越語言：「阿闍梨！今日當我家食。」此即名食處。

If a monk arrives at a house and the supporter says, "Teacher, today you should eat at my house," this is considered a place of eating.

比丘作是念：「此食未熟，我今欲到餘家。」爾時應白已去。

If the monk thinks, "This food is not ready yet, I want to go to another house," they should inform before leaving.

若不白去，波夜提。

If they leave without informing, it is an offence.

若彼間得五正食，五雜正食，食者，二波夜提。

If in the meantime, the five proper foods or five mixed proper foods are obtained and eaten, it results in two offences.

處處食、離食處不白，若病、若作施食法，食者無罪。

Eating here and there, leaving a dining place without informing, if sick, or practicing the food offering method, the eater is not at fault.

衣時者，二俱無罪。

In robe-wearing time, both are without fault.

若檀越作如是言：「阿闍梨！若無食時來我家食。」比丘往到其家，作是言：「長壽！我今日當此間食。」優婆夷言：「善哉！正爾當辦。」

If a supporter says, "Teacher, if you have no food, come to my house to eat," and the monk goes to their house and says, "Long life! I will eat here today," and the female supporter says, "Good! I'll make it right away."

若食未熟，此比丘欲往餘家者，當白去。

If the food is not ready yet and the monk wants to go to another house, they should inform before leaving.

若不白者，如上說得罪。

If they leave without informing, as mentioned above, they incur an offence.

若比丘次行乞食到一家，檀越言：「今日此間請諸比丘食，願阿闍梨亦受我請，勿復餘處食。」

If a monk goes begging for food and arrives at a house, and the supporter says, "Today we invite the monks here to eat, and I hope the teacher will also accept my invitation, and not eat elsewhere."

若比丘受請者即名食處。

If the monk accepts the invitation, this is considered a place of eating.

若乞食比丘受請已，作是念：「誰能受是重信施食？」若欲捨去者，應白已去。

If a begging monk receives the invitation and thinks, "Who can bear this great act of faith?" and wants to leave, they should inform before leaving.

若不白去者，如上說得罪。

If they leave without informing, as mentioned above, they incur an offence.

若比丘有大功德名稱，有眾多人送食來，欲取諸檀越意，一切受請食者犯處處食，得波夜提。

If a monk is renowned for great merits, and many people send food, and they want to please all supporters by accepting all food invitations, it is an offence of eating here and there.

若作施食法、若病，無罪。

If they are practicing the food offering method or are sick, there is no fault.

若衣時者，二俱無罪。

If it's during robe-wearing time, both are without fault


有二比丘，各各別受一家長請，第一比丘語第二比丘言：「長老！今日共到我檀越家食去。」
There were two monks, each separately invited by a household head. The first monk said to the second monk, "Elder, today let's go to my benefactor's house to eat."

第二比丘應白已去。
The second monk should reply and then go.

若不白去者，如上說。
If he does not reply before going, as stated above.

若第二比丘請者，亦如是。
If the second monk extends the invitation, it's the same.

比丘食處者，麥飯三鉢他邏、麨二鉢他邏、米一鉢他邏。
As for the monks' meal place, they have three bowls of barley rice, two bowls of wheat porridge, and one bowl of rice.

作飯魚肉，若一鉢半鉢，是中一一是比丘食。
With cooked rice and fish or meat, if it is one and a half bowls, it's each monk's portion to eat.

若一家或得三升、或二升、或一升、半升，如是眾多乞得，無罪。
If one family gets three sheng, two sheng, one sheng, or half a sheng, it is obtained by many begging and is not a sin.

若一家得三鉢他麥飯，麨二鉢他、若一鉢他，米作飯魚肉若一鉢半鉢，餘處更不得取，此中何等是犯？
If one family gets three bowls of barley rice, two bowls of wheat porridge, or one bowl, with rice cooked with fish or meat as one and a half bowls, further taking elsewhere is not allowed. Which actions here are offenses?

何等不犯？
Which are not offenses?

若粥初出釜畫成字者犯，若不成字者不犯。
If the porridge, when first taken from the pot, can form letters, it's an offense; if not, it's not an offense.

一切菜、一切麨、一切餅、一切果、非處處食、非別眾食、非足食，多積舍里，不犯。
All vegetables, all wheat porridge, all cakes, all fruits are not for every place, not for other groups to eat, not enough to eat, even if accumulated much in the residence, it is not an offense.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, and spoke extensively as above.

爾時有婆羅門請僧施食時，辦種種飲食訖，漉淨水敷床褥已，作如是念：「阿闍梨是一食人，當須早食。」
At that time, a Brahmin invited the monks for a meal offering; after preparing various kinds of food, filtering clean water, and arranging mats, he thought, “The Ācārya has one meal a day, so he should eat early.”

即往到祇洹，頭面禮僧足，胡跪合掌，作如是言：「我某甲請僧食，食具已辦，願僧知時。」
He then went to Jetavana, bowed with his head at the monks' feet, knelt with joined palms, and said, “I, so-and-so, invite the monks for a meal; the preparations are ready, may the monks be aware of the time.”

爾時比丘到時，著衣持鉢往到其家，次第坐已，時婆羅門自手下種種飲食，自恣飽滿。
Then, when it was time, the monks put on their robes, took their bowls, went to his house, and sat in order. At that time, the Brahmin personally served various foods, satisfying them to fullness.

婆羅門復自持食，順行強勸，諸比丘皆言：「不用飽滿。」
The Brahmin again personally served the food and strongly urged them, but all the monks said, “There's no need, we are full.”

諸比丘食訖，無緣者徑還精舍，有緣者過諸檀越。
After eating, the monks without other duties went straight back to the monastery, while those with duties visited the various patrons.

檀越見已，歡喜禮拜問訊，作是言：「阿闍梨須前食不？須果蓏不？須粥不？若阿闍梨有所須者，我當作。」
The patrons, seeing them, joyfully greeted them with respect and asked, “Ācārya, do you need any more food? Do you need fruits? Do you need porridge? If the Ācārya needs anything, I will provide.”

比丘言：「我於某甲婆羅門家，食已飽滿。」
The monk said, “At so-and-so Brahmin’s house, I have already eaten to fullness.”

時檀越知比丘食時未過，作是言：「阿闍梨！日故早，可持此餅還精舍食。」
The patron, knowing the meal time was not yet over for the monk, said, “Ācārya! The day is still early, you may take this cake back to the monastery to eat.”

比丘即授鉢與盛滿鉢餅，還到祇洹門間坐食此餅，復喚餘比丘共食。
The monk then received a bowl filled with cakes, returned to the gate of Jetavana to sit and eat the cakes, and called other monks to share the meal.

時婆羅門自食訖，語其婦言：「以餘食餉諸隣近，我欲往詣世尊所，禮覲問訊。」
At that time, after finishing his meal, the Brahmin said to his wife, “Send the remaining food to nearby neighbors, I wish to go to the Blessed One to pay respects and inquire his well-being.”

遙見比丘在祇洹門間坐共食餅，見已往一經行比丘所，問言：「此是客比丘耶？」
From a distance, he saw the monks sitting at the gate of Jetavana eating cakes together, and went to a passing monk to ask, “Are these guest monks?”

答言：「非也。」
He answered, “No.”

「是欲行比丘耶？」
“Are they visiting monks?”

答言：「非也。」
He answered, “No.”

又問：「是我家食比丘耶？」
He further asked, “Are they the monks who ate at my house?”

答言：「是。」
He answered, “Yes.”

復問言：「作何等？」
He asked again, “What are they doing?”

比丘言：「婆羅門汝不知耶？」
The monk said, “Brahmin, do you not know?”

答言：「不知。」
He replied, “I do not know.”

「此比丘食少，更足令滿。」
“These monks ate a little, then they further completed their fullness.”

時婆羅門心即不悅，作是言：「沙門釋子是實語人，而今不實。不足言足，用言不用，不滿言滿。此壞敗人，有何道哉？」
At that time, the Brahmin was displeased in his heart, saying, “The ascetic sons of the Śākya are supposed to be truthful, but now they are not. They claim fullness when insufficient, accept when not accepting, and claim to be full when not. These corrupted people, what righteous path do they have?”

以心嫌故竟不詣佛，於是便還。
Because of his displeasure, he did not visit the Buddha and simply returned.

諸比丘聞已，往白世尊，佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The monks, hearing this, went to report to the Blessed One, who said, “Call that monk here.”

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After he came, the Buddha asked the monk, “Is it true?”

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, “It is true, Blessed One!”

佛言：「比丘！汝云何食足已起，離坐而更食？從今以後不聽食足已，離坐更食。」
The Buddha said, “Monk! How can you get up after you have eaten to fullness, leave your seat, and eat again? From now on, you are not allowed to eat more after getting up from a meal having felt full.”




次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and extensively explained as above.

爾時諸比丘噉菜言足，噉鹽言足，飲水已，皆名為足。
At that time, the monks ate vegetables considering it sufficient, ate salt considering it sufficient, and after drinking water, all were called sufficient.

離坐處更不噉食，身體羸瘦。
They did not eat again after leaving their seats, causing their bodies to become thin and weak.

諸比丘以是因緣，往白世尊，
The monks, due to this reason, approached the World-honored One,

佛言：「從今已後，聽食五正食、五雜正食，是名為足。」
The Buddha said, "From now on, you are allowed to eat the five pure foods and five mixed pure foods; this is considered sufficient."

爾時諸比丘在坐處，得少食已，名作足食，更不復食，猶故羸劣。
At that time, the monks, after eating a little while seated, considered it a full meal and did not eat again, yet still remained weak.

諸比丘以是因緣，往白世尊，
The monks, due to this reason, approached the World-honored One,

佛言：「一坐食，五正食，五雜正食，自恣與，是名足。」
The Buddha said, "A single sitting meal with the five pure foods and five mixed pure foods, freely given, is considered sufficient."




衛城，
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti,

爾時祇洹精舍有六十比丘病，
at that time there were sixty sick monks in the Jeta Grove Monastery.

比丘迎六十分食，
The monks received portions of food for sixty monks,

病比丘食殘不盡，
but the sick monks could not finish their food,

棄著牆邊，
and they discarded it by the wall,

烏鳥共噉鬪諍作聲。
causing crows and other birds to fight over it, making noise.

佛知而故問：「比丘！此眾鳥何以聲大？」
The Buddha, knowing this, asked, "Monks, why is there so much noise from the birds?"

諸比丘白佛言：「有六十比丘病，為迎食分，
The monks replied to the Buddha, "There are sixty sick monks who have received food portions,

食不能盡，棄著牆邊，
but they cannot finish the food and have discarded it by the wall,

眾鳥諍此殘食故，
thus the birds are fighting over the leftover food,

出大聲耳。」
which is why they are making loud noises."

佛語諸比丘：「若病比丘食不盡者，
The Buddha said to the monks, "If the sick monks cannot finish their food,

聽看病比丘作殘食法已得食。」
allow those caring for the sick monks to make use of the leftover food."




衛城，爾時看病比丘作殘食法，食已猶故不盡，眾鳥共諍，如上說。  
Again, the Buddha was residing in Sravasti, at that time, a sick monk practiced the leftover food rule, and after eating, it was still not finished, causing the birds to quarrel, as previously mentioned.

佛知而故問比丘：「眾鳥何以鬪諍？」  
The Buddha knowingly asked the monk, "Why are the birds quarreling?"

諸比丘白佛言：「看病比丘作殘食法，食已猶不能盡，棄著牆邊，以是故眾鳥諍食作聲。」  
The monks told the Buddha, "The sick monk used the leftover food rule, and after eating, it was still not finished, so he discarded it by the wall, which is why the birds are making noise over the food."

佛言：「從今日聽一人作殘食，餘人盡得食。」  
The Buddha said, "From today, allow only one person to make leftover food, and the rest may partake in it."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "Everyone residing in Sravasti should gather. For the benefit of all, I am laying down a precept for the monks, and those who have heard it should hear it again. 

若比丘食已足，起離坐，不作殘食，食者，波夜提。」  
If a monk has eaten sufficiently, gets up from his seat, and does not leave leftovers, this is a rule of offense."  




比丘者，如上說。
Monks, as mentioned above.




食者有五種：麨、飯、麥飯、魚、肉。
There are five kinds of food: flour, rice, wheat rice, fish, and meat.

復有五雜正食，是名食。
There are also five mixed staple foods, which are called food.




足有八種：一者自恣足；
There are eight types of satisfaction: first is self-satisfaction;

二者少欲足；
second is contentment with fewer desires;

三者穢污足；
third is satisfaction with impurities;

四者雜足；
fourth is mixed satisfaction;

五者不便足；
fifth is inconvenient satisfaction;

六者諂足；
sixth is hypocritical satisfaction;

七者停住足；
seventh is stationary satisfaction;

八者自己足。
eighth is self-sufficient satisfaction.

自恣足者，檀越自恣與麨飯麥飯魚肉，及雜正食，自恣勸食。
Self-satisfaction is when the donor freely offers wheat meals, rice, fish, meat, and mixed proper food, and encourages eating freely.

比丘言：「我已滿足。」如是起離坐，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名自恣足。
The monk says, “I am already satisfied.” Thus rises from the seat, leaving no leftovers, if they eat, it is called self-satisfaction.

少欲足者，檀越自恣與五正食，及五雜正食，比丘動手現少取相，
Contentment with fewer desires is when the donor freely offers five proper foods and five mixed proper foods, and the monk shows a gesture of taking less.

如是離坐已，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名少欲足。
In this way, after leaving the seat, without leaving leftovers, it is called contentment with fewer desires.

穢污足者，行食時淨人手疥瘡及諸不淨，
Satisfaction with impurities is when during meals, the clean person's hands are dirty and have sores and impurities.

比丘見污之言：「不用過去。」起離坐處，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名穢污足。
The monk sees the impurity and says, "No need to proceed." Leaves the seating place, leaving no leftovers, it is called satisfaction with impurities.

雜足者，淨人持乳酪器盛麨飯行，比丘見已，惡之言：「不用過去。」
Mixed satisfaction is when a clean person carries a vessel with curd and rice and the monk, upon seeing it, disapproves and says, "No need to proceed."

起離坐，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名雜足。
Rises from the seat, leaving no leftovers, it is called mixed satisfaction.

不便足者，淨人行食，比丘問言：「是何等？」答言：「麨。」
Inconvenient satisfaction is when a clean person serves food, and the monk asks, "What is this?" and is answered, "Wheat meal."

比丘言：「此動我風病，我不便過去。」如是起離坐，不作殘食，食者，波夜提。
The monk says, "This stirs up my wind illness, I cannot proceed." Thus rises from the seat, leaving no leftovers.

若行飯時，比丘問言：「為堅軟？」答言：「堅。」
If serving rice, the monk asks, "Is it hard or soft?" The answer is, "Hard."

比丘言：「此硬米難消，我不便過去。」若言：「軟。」
The monk says, "This hard rice is difficult to digest, I cannot proceed." If answered, "Soft."

比丘言：「此爛難食，我不便過去。」
The monk says, "This soft rice is difficult to eat, I cannot proceed."

若行肉時，比丘問言：「是何等肉？」答言：「牛肉。」
If serving meat, the monk asks, "What kind of meat?" The answer is, "Beef."

比丘言：「牛肉性熱，我不便下過。」若言：「水牛肉。」
The monk says, "Beef is hot in nature, I can't eat it." If answered, "Water buffalo meat."

比丘言：「冷性難消下過。」若言：「鹿肉。」
The monk says, "It is cold and hard to digest." If answered, "Deer meat."

比丘言：「此肉風性下過。」是名不便足，如是起離坐已，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名不便足。
The monk says, "This meat is windy in nature." This is called inconvenient satisfaction. Thus, after rising from the seat without leaving leftovers, it is called inconvenient satisfaction.

諂足者，淨人行五正食、五雜正食，比丘畏多，口不言足，現手作相、若搖頭、若縮鉢作相，
Hypocritical satisfaction is when a clean person serves five proper foods and five mixed proper foods, the monk fears excess, does not verbally express satisfaction, shows gestures with hands, nods, or makes bowl gestures.

起離座不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名諂足。
Rises from the seat leaving no leftovers, it is called hypocritical satisfaction.

停住足者，淨人行五正食、五雜正食，比丘言：「長壽！莫先行飯摶恐觸足，當先下菜、鹽、冷水。」
Stationary satisfaction is when a clean person serves five proper foods and five mixed proper foods, the monk says, "Longevity! Don't serve rice balls first to avoid touching satisfaction; serve vegetables, salt, and cold water first."

如是起離坐已，不作殘食，食者，波夜提。若作直月維那等指示現相不名足，是名停住足。
Thus, after rising from the seat without leaving leftovers, it is called stationary satisfaction. If straightforward gestures are made by the server, it is not named satisfaction, it is called stationary satisfaction.

自己足者，比丘乞食至一家，放麨囊置一處，從檀越乞水欲飲。
Self-sufficient satisfaction is when a monk begs for food to a household, places the flour sack in one place, and begs the donor for water to drink.

檀越作是念：「此比丘必當須麨。」即問言：「須麨不？」
The donor thinks, "This monk must need the wheat meal." Then asks, "Do you need the wheat meal?"

比丘作是念：「此檀越必欲家中取麨與我。」答言：「須。」
The monk thinks, "This donor wishes to take wheat meal from home for me." Replies, "Yes, I need."

時檀越即捉比丘麨囊授比丘，比丘以惜己麨故，便言：「置！置！」
The donor then grabs the monk’s flour sack and hands it to the monk, and the monk, cherishing his own flour, says, "Put it down! Put it down!"

如是語已，起離坐，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名自己足。
After saying this, rises from the seat, leaves no leftovers, it is called self-sufficient satisfaction.



行為所依，故名行。

Walking is the basis for behavior, hence it's called walking.

住則恒足，無作躍躂，故名住。

Standing implies constantly having footing, without jumping or detaching, hence it's called standing.

坐依床座，曲腰垂臂，故名坐。

Sitting relies on a seat, with a bent waist and lowered arms, hence it's called sitting.

臥者偃仰，故名臥。

Lying down means reclining, hence it's called lying.

以床為形，故名長床。

With a bed as the form, hence it's called a long bed.

坐而床處，故名坐床。

Sitting with the bed as a place, hence it's called a sitting bed.

依船水浮，故名船。

Relying on a boat to float on water, hence it's called a boat.

依乘行動，故名乘。

Relying on a vehicle for movement, hence it's called a vehicle.




住者，比丘立食自恣與食，應立足中間。
There are those who, providing unreserved alms to a standing monk, should stand between.

若行若坐若臥，皆名離本處不作殘食，
Whether walking, sitting, or lying down, all are referred to as being away from their place and not leaving remnants of food.

食者，波夜提。行坐臥亦如是。
Eating infringements, [they incur a] pacittiya. Walking, sitting, lying down are the same.



若比丘在長床上坐，自恣與食，
If a monk is sitting on a long bed, and is freely given food,

若見上座、若和上、阿闍梨來，不得起離坐避，
If he sees a senior, a companion, or a preceptor coming, he must not get up to avoid them,

得曳身不離床移避，
He may move his body to avoid them without leaving the bed,

若床脚折者，即名離本處。
If the leg of the bed breaks, then it is said that he has left his original place.

若不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名長床坐。
If he does not eat leftovers, a Pācittiya offense is committed, and this is called sitting on a long bed.



床者，若比丘在獨坐床上座，自恣與食。
A bed is for a monk to sit alone on it, and to eat freely as one wishes.

若坐方覺背後有塔、若僧、若和上、阿闍梨，應不離床迴身。
If while sitting one realizes there is a pagoda, a monk, a preceptor, or teacher behind, one should turn around without leaving the bed.

若雨者，當持傘蓋覆上。
If it rains, one should hold an umbrella over oneself.

若無蓋者，得合床舉著覆處，若舉時到地，即名離本處。
If no cover is available, one may fold the bed and place it over oneself; once lifted to the ground, it is considered moved from its original spot.

若不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名坐床。
If one doesn't leave leftover food, the act of eating is called "Pācittiya," and this is sitting on the bed.



船者，若比丘在船上自恣與食，

If a monk is freely eating on a boat,

若船築岸、若觸木石、若迴波，比丘身離本處，

and the boat docks, hits wood or rocks, or turns with the waves, causing the monk to leave his original place,

不作殘食，食者，波夜提。

without leaving leftovers as intended, he commits an offense of expiation.




乘者，若比丘在乘上自恣與食，若乘上坂、下坂、

One who rides: if a monk freely accepts food in the vehicle, whether it is on an incline or decline,

若乘飜身離本處，不作殘食，食者，波夜提，是名乘。

if he moves from the original place without leaving leftovers, commits a pācittiya offense; this is called riding.



有五非法不名作殘食。

There are five inappropriate ways that are not considered leftover food.

何等五？

Which five?

離處、離食、離境界、離申手、離語。

Physical separation, food disconnection, boundary separation, hand extension, speech separation.

離處者，若為作殘食，比丘行時與噉食，住時、坐時、臥時，說殘食法，是不名作。

For physical separation, when monks are on the move and given food, staying, sitting, or lying down, explaining the leftover food rule is not deemed as making leftovers.

如是住坐臥時與噉食，行時、住時、坐時，說殘食法，是名離處。

Similarly, if given food while staying, sitting, or lying down, and explaining the leftover rule while moving, staying, or sitting, it's considered physical separation.

離食者，不與噉作殘食，即便說與，不名作，是名離食。

Food disconnection means not making leftovers by not giving, and if given, not regarded as making leftovers, is called food disconnection.

離境界者，食放地作殘，非手中，不名作，是名離境界。

Boundary separation refers to food placed on the ground becoming leftovers, not from the hand, is not deemed as making; it's called boundary separation.

離申手者，舒手外作殘食，非申手內，不名作，是名離申手。

Hand extension involves making leftovers by reaching out, not within a hand's extension, is not deemed as making; it's known as hand extension.

離語者，口不作是言：「我手中鉢中食，我今一切不須，是殘食與長老。」

Speech separation involves not saying, "The food in my hand or bowl, I no longer need it, is given as leftover to the elder."

是名離語，不名作，是名五非法，不成作殘食。

This is called speech separation and is not considered making; it is named the five inappropriate ways, and they do not constitute making leftovers.




有五如法，名如法作殘食。

There are five proper ways, called the correct way to offer leftovers.

何等五？不離處、不離食、不離境界、不離申手內、不離語。

What are the five? Not leaving the place, not separating from food, not being outside the boundary, not extending the hand outward, not separating from speech.

不離處者，若為作殘食，比丘行時與噉，即行時說殘食法，是名作。

Not leaving the place means, if offering leftovers, when the monk is walking and given food, stating the method of offering leftovers immediately while walking is proper.

如是住時、坐時、臥時亦如是，是名不離處。

Similarly, whether standing, sitting, or lying down, this is called not leaving the place.

不離食者，噉食已即說殘食法與，是名不離食。

Not separating from food means, after having eaten, immediately stating the method of offering leftovers, this is called not separating from food.

不離境界者，在手中作殘食，非在地，是名不離境界。

Not being outside the boundary means, making the leftovers in hand and not placing them on the ground, this is called not being outside the boundary.

不離申手者，申手內作殘食，非申手外，是名不離申手。

Not extending the hand outward means, making leftovers within the extended hand, not outside, this is called not extending the hand outward.

不離語者，為噉已作是言：

Not separating from speech means, after eating, making the statement:

「我手中鉢中所有飯食，我今一切不須，是殘食與長老。」

"In my bowl is rice and food I no longer need, which are leftovers to give to the elder."

是名不離語，是名五如法作殘食。

This is called not separating from speech, and this is called the five proper ways to offer leftovers.




若成就五非法，盡命不得作殘食食。

Those who accomplish the five unwholesome practices will not be allowed to consume leftovers for life.

何等五？

What are the five?

於處不善、於食不善、於境界不善、於申手不善、於遮不善。

Improper place, improper food, improper domain, improper reaching, improper covering.

處不善者，不知行時食行足、住時食住足、坐時食坐足、臥時食臥足，是名處不善。

Improper place means not knowing to eat with walking when walking, to eat with standing when standing, to eat with sitting when sitting, to eat with reclining when reclining; this is called improper place.

食不善者，不知五正食、五雜正食是足，餘者非足，是名食不善。

Improper food means not knowing the five proper foods and five mixed proper foods suffice, and others are insufficient; this is called improper food.

境界不善者，不知在手中者是足，在地者不足，是名境界不善。

Improper domain means not knowing what is in the hand is sufficient and what is on the ground is insufficient; this is called improper domain.

申手不善者，不知在申手內是足，申手外是不足，是名申手不善。

Improper reaching means not knowing what is within reach is sufficient and what is beyond reach is insufficient; this is called improper reaching.

遮不善者，不知遮是足，不遮是不足，是名遮不善。

Improper covering means not knowing covering is sufficient and not covering is insufficient; this is called improper covering.

如是成就此五非法，盡命不聽作殘食食。

Thus, accomplishing these five unwholesome practices, one is not allowed to consume leftovers for life.



若成就五如法，聽盡壽作殘食食。

If one fulfills the five proper practices, they are allowed to consume leftovers for life.

何等五？

What are the five?

善處、善食、善境界、善申手、善遮。

Good place, good food, good environment, good hand extension, good coverage.

善處者，知行時食行足，知立時食立足，知坐時食坐足，知臥時食臥足，是名善處。

Good place means knowing to eat while walking when walking, to eat while standing when standing, to eat while sitting when sitting, and to eat while lying when lying; this is called a good place.

善食者，知五正食、五雜正食是足，餘者非足，是名善食。

Good food means knowing the five proper foods and five mixed proper foods are sufficient, others are insufficient; this is called good food.

善境界者，知食在手中是足，在地非足，是名善境界。

Good environment means knowing food in the hand is sufficient, on the ground is insufficient; this is called a good environment.

善申手者，知申手內是足，申手外非足，是名善申手。

Good hand extension means knowing reaching inside is sufficient, reaching outside is insufficient; this is called good hand extension.

善遮者，知遮是足、不遮非足，是名善遮。

Good coverage means knowing covering is sufficient, not covering is insufficient; this is called good coverage.

成就此五法，盡命聽作殘食食。

Achieve these five practices, and one is allowed to consume leftovers for life.




若比丘持食來欲作殘食時，即於鉢上椀中作殘者，正得椀中名作殘食，鉢中食不名作。
When a monk brings food to make leftovers, if it is placed as leftovers in the bowl on top, it is considered leftovers, but the food in the alms bowl is not considered so.

若椀中食汁流入鉢中，得俱名殘食。
If the liquid from the bowl flows into the alms bowl, both are considered leftovers.

若比丘並兩鉢索作殘食，若前人正食一鉢中食者，正一鉢得作殘食。
If a monk requests leftovers using two alms bowls, and in the front person’s alms bowl there’s proper food, that bowl’s food is considered leftovers.

若二鉢上若餅若菜通覆鉢橫上者，二俱得名作殘食，餘種種器亦如是。
If there are cakes or vegetables covering both bowls across, both are called leftovers, the same applies to various other containers.

若比丘食足已，往檀越家，主人言：「阿闍梨！能食餅不？」答言：「我食已足。」知法優婆塞作是言：「某甲家有比丘未足，若須食者，我當往作殘食法。」
If a monk, after being full, goes to a patron's house and the host says: "Master! Can you eat cake?" and the monk replies, "I am already full," a knowledgeable lay disciple would say: "There is a monk at a certain person's house who hasn’t had enough. If you need more, I can go make leftovers."

比丘若須者，應答言：「可爾。」
If the monk needs it, he should reply: "That is fine."

檀越淨洗器，盛滿中種種美食，比丘受取持好細㲲裹，莫使外塵土得入，著淨人手中，作是言：「汝去作殘食已持來。」
The patron cleans the container, fills it with various delicacies, and the monk receives it, wraps it in fine cloth to prevent dust, gives it to the clean person, saying: "Go make leftovers and bring it back."

淨人持食，到彼比丘所，作如是言：「尊者！我家中有食未足食比丘，願尊者為我作殘食。」
The clean person brings the food to the monk, saying: "Venerable! In my house, there is food that a monk has not finished, and I wish you to make leftovers for me."

彼比丘應淨洗手，受此食已，語淨人言：「汝近我邊在申手內立。」
The monk should clean his hands, receive the food, and say to the clean person: "Stand close by my side with your hand stretched out."

比丘於彼鉢中食一口已，作如是言：「我手中器中所有食，一切不須，作殘食與汝。」
After eating a bite from that alms bowl, the monk says: "All the food in my hand-held container is not needed, make leftovers and give it to you."

淨人持來授與比丘，比丘得食。
The clean person brings it back and gives it to the monk, and the monk gets the food.

若更有餘已足，比丘須者亦得共食。
If there are others who have already eaten and are full, and the monk needs it, they can also eat together.

若國土少比丘處，比丘食已，有大檀越持種種飲食至，比丘已起去，當云何？
If in a region with few monks, a monk has finished eating, and a great patron brings various food and drink and the monk has already left, what should be done?

若彼間有直月維那、諸知事人、未食足者，當從彼人邊作殘食。
If there are stewards or responsible persons in that interval who have not eaten enough, leftovers should be made on their side.

若彼已食足，若上座未足者，當於上座邊作殘食。
If they have already eaten enough, but an elder has not, leftovers should be made on the elder's side.

若上座羞，不能人中作者，當合坐舉，上座至屏處作殘食。
If the elder is shy and cannot act among people, a meeting should be held to bring the elder to a private spot to make leftovers.

若上座已足者，有客比丘來者，當問：「長老！今日自恣足未？」
If the elder is full and a guest monk comes, ask: "Elder! Have you had your fill today?"

若客比丘答言：「我未得夏安居，云何得自恣足？」當知是人不知律相，更應問：「汝食未？」
If the guest monk replies: "I haven't experienced the summer residence, how can I have my fill?" know that this person does not know the vinaya well, further ask: "Have you eaten?"

若言：「已食。」復問：「檀越自恣與不？」若言：「長老何處得自恣食？水菜尚不足，況復餘食。」
If he says: "I have eaten," further ask: "Did the patron serve you sufficiently?" if he replies: "Elder, where did you get enough? The water and vegetables are not enough, let alone other food."

當知是不足，應從彼比丘作殘食法。
Know that it is not enough, leftovers should be made for that monk.

若言：「我檀越家自恣與食。」當知已足，僧應作方便，不應破檀越善心。
If he says: "My patron gave me enough food," know that he is full, and the monks should be convenient and not break the patron's kind intention.

若眾中有大沙彌，將至戒場上，與受具足，教作殘食法已，然後當食。
If in the assembly there is a senior novice, bring him to the ordination platform, grant him full ordination, teach him the leftovers-making method, and then he should eat.

若比丘食五雜正食，離五正食作殘食，是不名作。
If a monk eats the five mixed lawful foods, separating them to make leftovers is not considered making.

若不足，更食者無罪。
If not enough, eating more is not a fault.

若足起離坐更食者，得越毘尼罪。
If full, getting up, leaving the seat, and eating more leads to an infraction against the vinaya.

若比丘食五正食，離五雜正食作殘食，不名作。
If a monk eats the five lawful foods, separating them to make leftovers, it is not called making.

若不足，食無罪。
If insufficient, eating is not a fault.

若食足離坐更食者，波夜提。
If full, getting up from the seat to eat more incurs poṣadha.

若比丘離五正食、離五雜正食，作殘食者，不名作殘食。
If a monk separates the five lawful foods, separated from mixed lawful foods, to make leftovers, it is not called making leftovers.

不足更食者，無罪。
If there's not enough, eating more is not a fault.

若足起離坐更食者，得越毘尼罪。
If full, getting up from the seat to eat more incurs vinaya offense.

若比丘食五正食、五雜正食作殘食，是名如法作殘食。
If a monk eats the five lawful foods and the five mixed lawful foods and makes leftovers, it is called properly making leftovers.

若食未足，更食無罪。
If eating is not enough, eating more is not a fault.

若足起離坐，更食犯罪。
If full, getting up from the seat, eating more is a fault.

此中何者犯？何者非犯？
Which of these is an offense, and which is not?

若一切粥新出釜畫不成字，一切果一切菜、非別眾食、非處處食、非足食、多積屋裏，不犯。
If all the porridge is newly taken from the pot and cannot form a word, all fruits, all vegetables, foods not meant for specific groups, foods not placed everywhere, not full meals, and many stored in a house, it's not an offense.

是故說。
Thus, it is said.




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti, teaching extensively as above.

爾時阿難有二共行弟子：一名滿荼，二名阿毘耆。
At that time, Ananda had two companions: one named Manju, the other named Apiji.

共尊者大目連二共行弟子：一名阿闍都，二名舍舍都，各各作如是言：「誰多聞？誰辯才？」
Similarly, the venerable Mahamoggallana had two companions: one named Ajatu, the other named Shashatu, and each spoke thus: "Who is more learned? Who is more eloquent?"

時阿難共行弟子辯才利根，目連弟子論議不如，行住坐臥常隨逐左右伺求其短。
At that time, Ananda's companions were eloquent and sharp, while Mahamoggallana's companions were not as good in debate, constantly looking for flaws in their actions, whether walking, standing, sitting, or lying down.

或時二人同受一請，時尊者目連弟子得餅，食半持半出外語阿難弟子，如是言：「長老！汝欲食餅不？」
Sometimes, when both received an invitation together, Mahamoggallana's disciple obtained a cake, ate half, and took the other half outside to Ananda's disciple, saying: "Elder! Do you want to eat a cake?"

問言：「汝何處得餅？」
He asked: "Where did you get the cake?"

答言：「我於彼食處持來。」
The reply was: "I brought it from the eating place."

即便取食。食已便作是言：「長老！汝犯罪。」
He then took it and ate. After eating, he said: "Elder! You have committed an offense."

問言：「何等罪？」
He asked: "What offense?"

答言：「世尊制戒不聽比丘食足已離坐，不作殘食法更食。」
He replied: "The Blessed One prescribed a rule prohibiting a monk from leaving the seat after eating his fill, without making an offering of leftovers, and then eating again."

阿難弟子言：「汝云何欲中我不作殘食法，而教我食？」
Ananda's disciple said: "How could you want to trap me into not making an offering of leftovers, and yet instruct me to eat?"

目連弟子言：「汝前論議時，何故以辯才強折辱我？」
Mahamoggallana's disciple said: "During the previous debate, why did you use your eloquence to overpower and humiliate me?"

遂共諍競，往世尊所，頭面禮足，却住一面，以上因緣，具白世尊，
They argued and disputed, then went to the Blessed One, paid homage, and stood to one side, explaining the entire situation to the Blessed One.

佛語諸比丘：「於意云何？我為諸聲聞說九部法，
The Buddha said to the monks: "What do you think? I taught the ninefold teachings to the disciples,

所謂《修多羅》、《祇夜》、《授記》、《伽陀》、《優陀那》、《如是語》、《本生》、《方廣》、《未曾有》，
namely, Sutra, Geya, Vyakarana, Gatha, Udana, Itivrittaka, Jataka, Vaipulya, Adbhutadharma,

諸聲聞聞說此九部法已，為欲使諸弟子論議諍勝負耶？」
Did the disciples, upon hearing these ninefold teachings, intend to engage the students in debates to determine victory or defeat?"

答言：「不也。世尊！」
They replied: "No, Blessed One!"

佛語諸比丘：「若不爾者，我為諸聲聞說此九部法，欲使諸聲聞如說修行不？」
The Buddha said to the monks: "If not, did I teach these ninefold teachings so that the disciples would practice them as instructed?"

答言：「如是。世尊！」
They replied: "Yes, Blessed One!"

時二比丘即於世尊前，相向悔過，
At that time, the two monks, in front of the Blessed One, faced each other and repented.

佛言：「不得自恃知法輕他，亦不聽知比丘食已足，不作殘食法，強勸令食。」
The Buddha said: "Do not rely on your knowledge of the Dharma to belittle others, nor allow a monk who has eaten his fill, without making an offering of leftovers, to be forcefully urged to eat."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "All those staying in the city of Shravasti should gather, and for the benefit of the ten, the monks' precepts are to be established, and those who have already heard should hear again.

若比丘知彼食已足，離坐不作殘食法，欲惱故勸食者，波夜提。」
If a monk knows another has eaten his fill, leaves his seat without making an offering of leftovers, and urges him to eat out of spite, such an act is a Pārājika."



比丘者，如上說。
A monk, as mentioned above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
Those who know, do so either by self-awareness or by hearing from others.




食者，五正食、五雜正食。
Food includes five staple foods and five mixed staple foods.




足者，有八種，如上說。
There are eight types of feet, as mentioned above.




離本處者，八種，如上說。
Those who leave the original place are of eight kinds, as mentioned above.




惱者，觸擾前人欲使不樂。
The one who annoys disturbs others to make them unhappy.




不作殘食者，五非法成就不名作殘食。
Not acting as a devourer, one not accomplished in the five unlawful methods cannot be called a devourer.

五法成就名如法作殘食。
One accomplished in the five lawful methods is called a devourer in accordance with the law.




強勸食，食者，波夜提。
Highly encouraging eating; if one eats, it is a pārājika offense.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pārājika, as stated above.




五非法成就，比丘盡命，不得作殘食食。
With the five illegal practices fulfilled, the monk, throughout life, should not make a meal from leftovers.

五法成就，盡命聽作殘食食，中間廣說如上。
With the five practices fulfilled, throughout life, making a meal from leftovers is permitted, as extensively explained above.

乃至足不足想勸食，越毘尼罪。
Even considering enough and not enough to encourage eating, violates Vinaya.

不足足想勸食，越毘尼罪。
Considering not enough as enough to encourage eating, violates Vinaya.

足作足想勸食，波夜提。
Considering enough as enough to encourage eating, incurs a Pācittiya.

不足不足想勸食，無罪。
Considering not enough as not enough to encourage eating, incurs no offense.

此中不犯者，一切粥初出釜畫不成字、一切果一切菜，是不犯。
Among these, not being of offense: any gruel at initial serving stage that can't be written on, all fruits and all vegetables, are not offenses.

是故說。
Therefore, it is said.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
When Buddha stayed in Shravasti, he gave extensive teachings as above.

爾時尊者阿那律一切糞掃，糞掃鉢、糞掃衣、糞掃食、糞掃革屣。
At that time, Venerable Aniruddha gathered all kinds of discarded items, including discarded bowls, robes, food, and leather sandals.

云何糞掃鉢？
What is a discarded bowl?

比丘破鉢滿五綴擲棄者，阿那律取已，更綴受持，是名糞掃鉢。
A monk's broken bowl with five patches is discarded, and Aniruddha takes it, patches it further, and holds it; this is known as a discarded bowl.

糞掃衣者，里巷中棄弊故衣，取淨浣補染受持，是名糞掃衣。
Discarded robes are old clothes abandoned in alleys. They are cleansed, patched, dyed, and worn; these are known as discarded robes.

糞掃食者，若他棄祠祀鬼神食，是長老自取食，是名糞掃食。
Discarded food is offerings to deities thrown away by others. The elder takes them for his own consumption; this is known as discarded food.

糞掃革屣者，諸比丘所著革屣斷壞棄者，拾取更補治著，是名糞掃革屣。
Discarded leather sandals are those that monks wore until they broke and were discarded. These are picked up, repaired, and worn; these are known as discarded leather sandals.

是長老時到著衣持鉢入城欲乞食，初入城門見一婦女，挾筐持飯，持草牛屎并火祭祀之具而出，
The elder, upon the right time, dressed and held his bowl, entered the city intending to beg for food. As he entered the city gate, he saw a woman carrying a basket with rice, straw, cow dung, and fire worship tools.

是尊者見已，作是念：「此中可有得食理，於我為樂，當更求。」
Having seen this, the venerable thought, "I might obtain food here happily, so I should try further."

即便捨去，從巷至巷，遍無所得。
Then he abandoned it and went from alley to alley and found nothing.

到池水邊，還見前婦人灑掃塗地，敷淨草安置祭具祭祀已訖。
By the side of a pond, he saw the same woman sprinkling water and sweeping the ground, spreading clean grass, arranging the offering tools, and completing her ritual.

以飯灑散四邊，作如是言：「賢烏來食！賢烏來食！」
She scattered rice on all sides, saying, "Good crows, come eat! Good crows, come eat!"

爾時尊者在一樹下立，尊者威神力故，眾烏無來食者。
At that time, the venerable stood under a tree, and due to his noble power, no crows came to eat.

時此婦人見尊者已，作如是言：「汝如瞎眼烏，常隨逐人。」
The woman saw the venerable and said, "You are like a blind crow, always following people."

婦人罵已即還。
After insulting him, the woman returned.

時尊者收拾祭食還向精舍，
At that time, the venerable collected the discarded offerings and returned to the monastery.

諸比丘見已，更相謂言：「是尊者求食極苦難得。」
The monks, having seen this, said to one another, "The venerable's quest for food is extremely arduous and hard to obtain."

諸比丘問言：「尊者得食不？」
The monks asked, "Did the venerable obtain food?"

答言：「得，但彼中有多過，不甘。」
He replied, "I obtained it, but it had many faults and was not delicious."

即問：「有何過？」
They immediately asked, "What faults does it have?"

答言：「如是！如是！」
He answered, "Like this! Like this!"

諸比丘聞已，往白世尊：「此罵女人為得幾罪？」
The monks heard and reported to the Buddha, "How many offenses does this woman commit for her insult?"

佛言：「得多罪。」
The Buddha said, "She accrues many offenses."

比丘復問：「齊幾為多？」
The monks further asked, "How many are considered many?"

佛語比丘：「此女人五百世中常作瞎眼烏，一切受身皆當餓死。」
The Buddha told the monks, "For five hundred lifetimes, this woman shall be a blind crow, and all her existences will end in starvation."

佛言：「呼阿那律來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Aniruddha here."

即呼來已，佛問阿那律：「汝實爾不？」
Having called him, the Buddha asked Aniruddha, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛語阿那律：「汝雖欲少事，從今日不聽不與自手取。」
The Buddha told Aniruddha, "Although you wish for little, from today you are not allowed to take anything without permission."




衛城，
Again, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī,

爾時世尊制不得自手取，
At that time, the World-Honored One made a rule against taking things by oneself,

諸比丘聞已，水及齒木皆從人受，
Upon hearing this, the monks received water and tooth wood from others.

有淨人者便得，無淨人者苦不能得。
If there was a pure person, they could get it; if not, they suffered from not obtaining it.

爾時世尊為大眾說法，
Then the World-Honored One was teaching the law to the assembly,

有比丘自聞口邊臭，
A monk noticed a bad smell from his mouth,

在眾人下風而坐，
and sat downwind from the others,

不欲令口臭氣熏諸梵行人。
so as not to let the bad breath affect the practitioners.

佛知而故問：「比丘何故在彼坐？如瞋恨人。」
The Buddha, knowing this, asked, "Monk, why are you sitting there? Like an angry person."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊制戒不授不得取，
The monks replied to the Buddha, "The World-Honored One instructed not to take without being given. 

諸比丘水及齒木，皆從人受。
The monks receive water and tooth wood from others.

有淨人者得，無淨人者苦不能得，
If there is a pure person, they can get it, if not, they suffer from not obtaining it.

口中氣臭恐熏諸梵行人故，在下風而住。」
The bad breath from the mouth might affect the holy practitioners, so we sit downwind."

佛言：「從今日聽除水及齒木。」
The Buddha said, "From today, it is allowed to exclude water and tooth wood."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，
The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing near the city of Śrāvastī should all gather,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
for the benefit of ten reasons, a precept is given to the monks, even those who have heard it before shall hear it again.

若比丘不與取，著口中除水及齒木，波夜提。」
If a monk takes something that is not given, placing it in the mouth except for water and tooth wood, it is a pācittiya offense."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as stated above.




不與者，他不與，不從前人受，著口中食者，除水及齒木。
For those who do not give, he does not receive, he does not accept from others, except for food in the mouth, except water and toothwood.

水有十種，如前說，若水濁者應受。
There are ten types of water, as mentioned earlier, if the water is turbid, it should be accepted.

若水性黃色者飲無罪。
If the water is naturally yellow, there is no fault in drinking it.

齒木者有二種：一、擗，二、團。
There are two types of toothwood: one is broken, the other is whole.

若比丘口中有熱氣生瘡，醫言：「應嚼齒木咽汁。」者，應當受。
If a monk has sores in the mouth due to heat, the doctor says: "You should chew toothwood and swallow the juice." This should be accepted.




除水及齒木，世尊說無罪。
The Blessed One declared that apart from water and tooth-wood, there is no guilt.




波夜提者，如上說。
Prajñā-pāramitā, as stated above.




食上
On food

樹上
On trees

井中
In wells

屋上
On roofs

淨厨
In a clean kitchen

器受非器受
Containers accepted and not accepted

床
On beds

船
On boats

乘
On vehicles

心念受
In mental acceptance

道路
On roads




食上者，若食時敷床、若長板、若甘蔗束、若蘿蔔束、若穀豆囊上、敷種種坐床褥覆上。
For eating, if at meal time various sitting mats are spread on beds, long boards, sugarcane bundles, radish bundles, or grain and bean sacks, then cover with bedding.

比丘坐時不應動身，不應問。
When the monk sits, he should not move his body or ask questions.

若動若問：「此是何等？」是名不淨。
If he moves or asks, "What is this?" it is called impure.

若比丘食時，風吹塵來坋鉢下草、不坋食者得食，草葉當受。
If when a monk is eating, the wind blows dust onto the grass under the bowl but not on the food, it is acceptable, and the grass leaves can be received.

若坋草葉及食者，一切更受。
If dust falls on the grass leaves and the food, everything must be renewed.

比丘食時，若牛、若駱駝等行，脚下塵來坋，不污食者得食。
When a monk is eating, if cows or camels walk by and dust falls from their feet without contaminating the food, it is still acceptable.

坋草葉者，當更受。
If dust is on the grass leaves, it must be renewed.

若坋草葉及食者，一切更受。
If dust falls on both grass leaves and the food, everything must be renewed.

若畜生振身塵來，若作意受者，得名為受。
If a creature shakes and dust is intentionally accepted, it is considered received.

若眾鳥塵來亦如是。
The same applies to dust from flocks of birds.

若比丘食時，女人行衣曳地塵起來坋，亦復如是。
When a monk is eating, if a woman's clothing drags on the ground and causes dust to rise, the same rule applies.

若淨人行草葉時，比丘應語言：「懸放。」
If a layperson holds grass leaves, the monk should say, "Hang it."

若行鹽果菜，應語：「懸放。」
If they carry salt, fruits, or vegetables, they should say, "Hang it."

若淨人行果墮草上，即轉去者，不名為受。
If a layperson drops fruit onto the grass but quickly retrieves it, it is not considered received.

小停者，得名為受。
If brief time passes, it is considered received.

果堅者得取洗，噉爛者不應取。
If the fruit is firm, it can be taken and washed; if it is rotten, it should not be taken.

若淨人行麨抖擻麨器，麨坋墮器中，若作意受者，即名為受。
If a layperson shakes a flour vessel and flour falls inside, if intentional acceptance occurs, it is considered received.

若不作意者，當更受。
If there is no intention, it must be renewed.

若淨人持器行麨，器墮比丘鉢中，即墮時以手撥去者，器故名淨。
If a layperson carries a utensil of flour and it falls into the monk's bowl, and is immediately removed by hand, the utensil is still considered clean.

若停須臾，即名不淨。
If it stays briefly, it is considered unclean.

若是銅器者，當淨洗用。
If it is a copper vessel, it should be washed clean before use.

若是木器膩，入中當棄。
If it is a greasy wooden vessel, it should be discarded if it enters inside.

若膩不入者，得削用。
If the grease does not enter, it can be scraped and used.

若行飯時，抖擻器飯迸空中來，比丘作受意者，即名為受。
If during the act of holding food, food scatters and falls into the monk's bowl, if he intends to receive it, it is considered accepted.

若不作受心者，當更受。
If he does not have the intention to receive, it must be renewed.

行酥乳酪肉菜醬等，亦復如是。
The same goes for ghee, yogurt, meat, vegetables, sauces, etc.

若作五年大會時，佛生日、得道日、轉法輪日、阿難大會時、羅睺羅大會時，若淨人難得，比丘應到菜聚邊受菜，行鹽麨飯亦如是。
During the five-year gatherings, Buddha's birthday, Enlightenment Day, Turning the Wheel of Dharma Day, Ananda gatherings, or Rahula gatherings, if laypersons are hard to find, the monk should go to the edge of the vegetable pile to receive vegetables, as with salt, flour, and rice.

若淨人舉不離地，亦得名為受，但非威儀。
If a layperson lifts things without leaving the ground, it is still considered received, but not proper conduct.

比丘應語淨人：「汝舉離地授我。」
The monk should say to the layperson, "Lift it off the ground and give it to me."

若淨人小不能舉者，應言：「汝稍稍分授我。」
If the layperson can't lift it high, he should say, "Give it to me in small portions."

受羹餅飲食時，亦復如是。
The same applies to receiving soups, cakes, and meals.

若受酥瓶時，繩著地者應語：「合是繩舉。」
When receiving a jar of ghee, if the rope touches the ground, he should say, "Lift this rope."

若淨人小不能舉者，應教：「稍稍減授我。」
If the layperson is unable to lift it properly, he should instruct, "Gradually reduce and give to me."

如是一切若鐺鑊熱不得受者，當以兩木橫置地，比丘脚躡上，當作是言：「受！受！」是名食上。
For hot pots and pans that cannot be received, place two pieces of wood horizontally on the ground, the monk steps on them, and say, "Receive! Receive!" This is known as food reception.



樹上者，淨人樹上食果，比丘言：「與我果。」
On the tree, a layperson eats fruit, a monk says, "Give me fruit."

淨人即搖樹落果，墮比丘器中者，得名為受，但非威儀。
The layperson shakes the tree, and fruits fall into the monk's bowl, this is called receiving, but not in accordance with the etiquette.

如是，若以脚、若以手、若以口下果時，果觸枝葉，比丘當更生心言：「受！受！」
Similarly, if one uses a foot, hand, or mouth to bring down fruit, and it brushes against branches or leaves, the monk should again think, "Received! Received!"

得名受。
This is called receiving.

若繩繫懸下，若脚、若手放繩下時，若觸枝葉者，亦當言：「受！受！」
If the fruit is tied with a rope and lowered with a foot or hand, and it touches branches or leaves, one should also say, "Received! Received!"

是名為受。
This is called receiving.

若淨人食麨豆時比丘欲得，即從索，作是言：「與我麨豆。」
If the layperson is eating flour and beans and the monk wants some, he may ask, saying, "Give me flour and beans."

淨人不欲與，比丘擗淨人手，瀉著衣裓中言：「受！受！」
If the layperson is unwilling, the monk hits the layperson's hand, pours it into his robe and says, "Received! Received!"

得名為受，但非威儀。
This is called receiving, but not elegantly.

獼猴樹上噉果，比丘欲得果，語獼猴言：「與我果。」
A monkey eats fruit on the tree, and the monk wants fruit and tells the monkey, "Give me fruit."

獼猴動樹下果，比丘以器承取。
The monkey shakes the tree, and the monk catches it with a bowl.

墮器中者，得名為受，但非威儀。
If it falls into the bowl, it is called receiving, but not elegantly.

如是，若手、若脚、口中下果時，若𢴤枝葉，當更生心言：「受！受！」
Similarly, if fruit is lowered by hand, foot, or from the mouth, and it brushes branches or leaves, one should again think, "Received! Received!"

得名為受，是名樹上。
This is called receiving, and this is called "on the tree."



井中者，若比丘在阿練若處住，井水滿，無淨人。
A bhikkhu living in a secluded place, like water in a well, has no pure person nearby.

比丘自抒井，有比丘言：「時到，可出食。」
The bhikkhu draws water from the well himself, and another bhikkhu says, "It's time to eat."

井中比丘言：「我若出者，水更還滿。
The bhikkhu in the well says, "If I go out, the water will refill.

我欲此間食，可下食來。」
I want to eat here, please lower the food in."

淨人應盛飲食著一器中，以繩紐繫下。
A pure person puts food in a container and lowers it with a rope.

食時，井底比丘應語淨人言：「下繩手捉。」
When eating, the bhikkhu at the bottom of the well should tell the pure person, "Hold the rope with one hand."

若井腹邊有生草木者，應教令避之。
If there are plants growing on the well's edge, they should be instructed to avoid them.

下至井底已，比丘應一手挽繩、一手承捉，作是言：「受！受！」
Upon reaching the well bottom, the bhikkhu should hold the rope with one hand and receive with the other, saying, "Receive! Receive!"

是名受。
This is called receiving.

若井水清者，自得取飲。
If the well water is clear, one can drink it directly.

若濁者，語淨人言：「持新淨瓶紐繫下水。」
If it's muddy, instruct the pure person to "Tie a fresh, clean jug and lower it for water."

如上說，是名井中。
As stated above, this is called being in the well.



屋上者，若比丘在阿練若處住，無淨人，比丘自覆屋。
Rooftop means that if a bhikkhu is living in the forest without a clean person, the bhikkhu covers his own roof.

有比丘語屋上比丘言：「食時至，可下食。」
A bhikkhu on the ground says to the bhikkhu on the rooftop, "It's meal time, you can come down to eat."

比丘言：「廢作上下亦復難，欲此間食，可上食來。」
The bhikkhu on the roof says, "It is troublesome to go up and down, I want to eat here, you can send the food up."

語淨人言：「持食著器中上。」
He tells a clean person, "Put the food in the vessel and bring it up."

比丘下長竿拘，語淨人：「著是拘上。」
The bhikkhu lowers a long stick and says to the clean person, "Place it on this stick."

作是言：「受！受！」是名受。
He says, "Receiving! Receiving!" This is called receiving.

下繩亦如是，是名屋上。
The same is done with a rope, this is called the rooftop.



净厨者，若新作僧伽蓝，不应在东厢北厢作厨屋，应在南厢西厢作厨屋，应开风道，通利水道，出荡涤𤄜水。

The kitchen, if newly established in a monastery, should not be built in the eastern or northern wing, but should be constructed in the southern or western wing. It should be ventilated and have proper drainage for wastewater.

厨屋中当作食栈。作食时，若净人小者，比丘得自净洗铜釜镬著水已，应语净人：「汝知洗米。」

Within the kitchen, there should be a place for storing food. When preparing food, if the servant is young, the monk can personally clean and wash the copper pot, fill it with water, and instruct the servant, "You know how to wash the rice."

若净人小不能作者，得捉手教，洗教泻抒饭。若食器不覆者语令覆。

If the servant is too young to perform the task, they may be guided by hand to teach washing and draining the rice. If the food containers are not covered, instruct them to cover them.

若无净人者，若有净席、净㲲、净板，得自覆，但悬放覆上。

If there is no servant, and if there is a clean mat, cloth, or board, one may cover the containers themselves, but they must simply be placed over the top.

若晒穀时，比丘在穀上行者，当脚处使净人㧥去。

When drying grain, if a monk walks over the grain, a servant should sweep the footmarks away.

若狮子虎狼逐，女人欲心逐，比丘舍走不看，虽蹈无罪。

If pursued by lions, tigers, wolves, or lustful thoughts of women, the monk can flee without looking back, and even if stepping on the grain, there is no fault.

若穀聚天雨者，当使净人覆。若无净人者，净席得遥擲覆上，得捉净砖石擲镇上。

If rain falls on the heap of grain, a servant should cover it. If there is no servant, a clean mat may be thrown to cover it, and a clean brick or stone can be thrown to hold it down.

若新作僧伽蓝，净厨里有种种物，有净油、有七日油，或麨瓶、石灰瓶、盐瓶、草屑瓶、石蜜瓶、埿瓶、苷蔗束、竹束、脯束、染树皮束，净屋中在一处，比丘语比丘言：「汝取七日油来。」

If establishing a new monastery, the clean kitchen may contain various items, such as clean oil, seven-day oil, or containers of flour, lime, salt, grass scraps, rock honey, clay, bundles of sugarcane, bamboo, dried meat, and dyed tree bark, stored in one place. A monk tells another monk, "Bring the seven-day oil."

比丘误捉净油来，比丘虽遥见知是净油，不得即语，恐其惊惧破器物故。

If the monk mistakenly takes the clean oil, even if another monk sees from afar and knows it is clean oil, he should not speak immediately, fearing the monk might be startled and break the container.

待来至已问言：「长老！是何等油？」答言：「七日油。」当语：「置！置！」不得名字，得作七日受持。

Wait until he arrives and then ask, "Elder! What kind of oil is this?" If he answers, "Seven-day oil," say, "Put it down! Put it down!" It should not be named, but used for seven days after offering.

若言：「长老！汝取净油来。」比丘误持七日油来，不得即语，待来至已问言：「长老！是何等油？」答言：「净油。」当语：「置！置！」故名七日油。

If instructed, "Elder! Bring the clean oil," and the monk mistakenly brings the seven-day oil, do not speak immediately. Wait until he arrives and ask, "Elder! What kind of oil is this?" If he answers, "Clean oil," say, "Put it down! Put it down!" This is called seven-day oil.

如是语：「取石灰瓶。」误持麨瓶；语：「取屑末瓶。」误持盐瓶；语：「取埿瓶。」误取石蜜瓶；语：「取竹束。」误取苷蔗束；语：「取染树皮束。」误持脯束来，广说如上。

Similarly, instructing, "Take the lime bottle," and mistakenly taking the flour bottle; saying, "Take the scraps bottle," and mistakenly taking the salt bottle; instructing, "Take the clay bottle," and mistakenly taking the rock honey bottle; saying, "Take the bamboo bundle," and mistakenly taking the sugarcane bundle; saying, "Take the dyed tree bark bundle," and mistakenly taking the dried meat bundle, they are explained as above.

比丘语比丘言：「长老！汝往审悉看灰瓶已，持来。」此比丘往，内手瓶中把麨，看此瓶故是净，若把麨还著瓶中者即名不净。

A monk tells another monk, "Elder! Go carefully examine the lime bottle and bring it." The monk goes, checks inside the bottle containing flour, finds it clean, but if he returns the flour into the bottle, it's then called unclean.

如是屑末瓶、埿瓶亦如是。若言：「汝审悉看竹已，持来。」比丘往拔苷蔗，看时故是净，若还刺束中举束不净。如是脯束亦尔。

The same applies for the scraps and clay bottles. If instructed, "Carefully examine the bamboo and bring it," a monk goes and takes the sugarcane, finds it clean, but if he inserts it back into the bundle, it becomes unclean. The same goes for the dried meat bundle.

若净厨屋破穿漏，语净人言：「出厨里一切物。」出已当塞鼠孔，扫地用拒磨埿之，壁底作砖埵，以次大者在下、小者著上。

If the clean kitchen roof leaks or walls break, tell the servant, "Remove everything from the kitchen." Once removed, fill mouse holes, sweep the floor, and use clay to plaster it, making a brick foundation with larger bricks at the bottom and smaller on top.

比丘得在中央立，指示安置乳酪、酥、油、蜜、石蜜、盐，不得见厨屋坏而不治，当随法律治事，是名厨屋。

The monk can stand in the center, giving instructions to store cheese, butter, oil, honey, rock honey, and salt. They should not see the kitchen in disrepair and fail to fix it, but follow the rules to manage the space; this is what defines a kitchen.



器受非器者，一切葉若捲者是器，舒者非器。

Container that holds non-containers: if all leaves are curled, they are containers; if spread out, they are non-containers.

若盤有緣深沒穬麥者，名為器。

If a plate is deeply submerged in wheat, it is called a container.

若床、若坐床繩，緻織者是器，若希織者非器。

If a bed or a sitting mat is tightly woven, it's a container; if loosely woven, it's not.

船，在水中非器，在岸上者是器。

A boat, in water is not a container, on the shore it is.

若車，駕牛時非器，無牛時是器。

If a cart is drawn by oxen, it's not a container; without oxen, it is.

若比丘乞食時，店肆家以斗盛麨與比丘，斗瑣連諸升，或五升、四升、三升、二升、一升相連，比丘爾時應語施主言：「解後升令相離已授我。」

If a monk begs for food and a shopkeeper measures flour in a container linked with several sections, like five, four, three, two, or one units, the monk should tell the donor: "Separate the sections before giving it to me."

若瑣不可得解者，比丘當從索葉已，令瀉葉上受，是名器受非器受。

If the sections cannot be separated, the monk should use a leaf to receive the flour, which is called using a container for non-container receiving.



床受者，若比丘床上坐、若禪、若眠，淨人持食來著抱中，若覺者即名受。
For those who receive on the bed, if a monk sits on the bed, whether meditating or sleeping, and a pure person brings food and places it in their arms, if they are aware, it is called receiving.

若不覺者，覺時欲食者，當從淨人更受。
If they are unaware and upon awakening wish to eat, they should receive it again from the pure person.

若不欲食者，當自捉已，授與淨人。
If they do not wish to eat, they should take it themselves and give it to the pure person.

如是著床上，懸床邊亦如是。
Placing it on the bed or hanging it on the side of the bed is the same.

若比丘棧閣上有淨食、若衣鉢，取衣鉢時動淨物，一切盡不淨。
If there is pure food or clothing vessels on the shelf, and when taking the clothing vessels, the pure items are moved, none is pure.

若堅不動，無罪。
If it remains still and unmoved, there is no fault.

若比丘衣架上，有酥瓶、油瓶，比丘取衣時，動者亦如是，是名床。
If there are butter or oil bottles on the monk's clothes rack, and when the monk takes the clothes they are moved, it is likewise the same; this is called the bed.



船者，船上載十七種穀，
A boat carries seventeen kinds of grain,

穀上敷籧篨，
On top of the grain is a mat,

若席覆上，
or a seat covers it,

比丘得在上坐，
monks may sit on it,

不應名字。
but should not name it.

若名字者，是名不淨。
If they do name it, it is called impure.

若此船卒為風吹、
If this boat is suddenly driven by the wind,

若下流、若迴波漂船上岸者，
or flows downstream, or is drifted by the waves to the shore,

一切皆不淨。
then everything is impure.

若繩、若竹篙不離水者是淨，
If the rope or bamboo pole does not leave the water, it is pure,

是名船。
this is called a boat.



车上载十七种谷，

When riding, if a large cart carries seventeen types of grains,

谷上敷篧篨席覆上，

A mat covers the grains on the top,

比丘在上坐，不应字名，

The monk sits on it, they should not speak the names,

字名者，即不净。

If they do, it is impure.

若小车上有净物、

If there are pure items on a small cart,

若衣钵，若比丘取衣钵时动净物者，

Such as robe and bowl, and if a monk moves the pure items while taking the robe and bowl,

一切不净。

Everything becomes impure.

应语净人：「与我取衣钵。」

They should tell a pure person, "Fetch me the robe and bowl."

不得以牛作净。

A cow should not be used for purity.

上时应使净人先上，

When ascending, a pure person should go up first,

然后比丘上。

Then the monk goes up.

下时比丘先下，

When descending, the monk should get off first,

净人后下。

The pure person gets off afterwards.

若载下坂时，

If carrying downhill,

车翻离地离牛，

The cart overturns off the ground and away from the cow,

一切皆不净。

Everything becomes impure.

若下坂，若车翻，

If descending, if the cart overturns,

牛身及绳尾不离车者，

If the cow's body and rope tail do not separate from the cart,

一切是净，

Everything remains pure,

是名乘。

This is called riding.




心念受者，有登瞿國，是邊地邪見人，惡比丘故不授食。
The mindful receiver ascended to Jeta's Grove, where he encountered heretics in the borderlands, and due to wicked monks, was not given food.

爾時當滿荼邏規地作相，若葉弊鉢下，遙作是言：「受！受！」
At that time, he marked the full Talaguri land, put down the worn-out leaf bowl, and from afar called out, "Receive! Receive!"

下時覺、墮鉢中時不覺，得名為受，但非威儀。
Being aware when placing it down but not when it falls into the bowl is considered reception, but not graceful.

墮時覺、初下時不覺，得名為受，但非威儀。
Being aware when it falls but not initially when placing it down is also considered reception, but not graceful.

下時、墮鉢中時盡覺，是名善受。
Being fully aware both when placing it down and when it falls into the bowl is called proper reception.

若比丘乞食時，若烏鳥墮肉叚比丘鉢中，下時覺、非墮時，是名為受，但非威儀。
If when a monk is begging for food, a bird drops meat into the monk's bowl, being aware when placing down but not when it falls, is called reception but not graceful.

墮時覺、非下時，是名受，但非威儀。
Being aware when it falls but not when placing it down is called reception but not graceful.

下時覺、墮時覺，是名善受，是名心念受。
Being aware both when placing down and when it falls is called proper reception, known as mindful reception.




道路者，若比丘欲共商人行，語商人言：「借我淨人。」
The path is such that if a monk wants to travel with a merchant, he says to the merchant, "Lend me a servant."

答言：「可爾。」
The merchant replies, "Alright."

臨發時，便言：「我無淨人，有牛，尊者須者當取。」
When about to depart, he says, "I have no servant, but I have an ox. If you need it, please take it, venerable sir."

使淨人長囊盛種種糧食，計日日食分，作一齊已，紐結著牛上，至食時，當使淨人取。
The servant should fill a long bag with various foods, calculating the daily portions, tie it onto the ox, and at mealtimes, let the servant take it.

若無淨人者，一人挽紐，一人承取，口言：「受！受！」是名受。
If there is no servant, one person pulls the string while another takes it, saying, "Receive! Receive!" This is called receiving.

若囊中糧食盡，道里未至所在者，當解囊淨浣已，更求糧食著囊中，紐結如前。
If the food in the bag is exhausted and the destination is not yet reached, the bag should be untied and cleaned, more food sought and put in, then tied as before.

在道行時，當隨時與牛食著涼處，不得使苦惱。
While traveling, the ox should be fed at a cool place, not causing it distress.

到已牛還本主。
Upon reaching the destination, the ox should be returned to its owner.

若比丘隨道行，過苷蔗園邊。
If a monk is traveling along the road and passes by a sugarcane field.

從守苷蔗園人乞，作如是言：「長壽！施我苷蔗。」
He begs from the sugarcane field guard, saying, "Long life! Grant me some sugarcane."

答言：「尊者自取。」
The guard replies, "Venerable sir, take it yourself."

比丘言：「長壽！我不得自取。」
The monk says, "Long life! I cannot take it myself."

又復言：「若欲食者便自取，若不欲食者便去。」
And he says again, "If you want to eat, take it yourself; if not, go away."

比丘爾時以繩紐繫好苷蔗著牛頭，作如是言：「知是眾生。」
At that time, the monk ties the sugarcane to the ox's head with a string, saying, "Know this, living being."

苷蔗園邊有火聚，即驅牛行過火，不使燒牛。
There is a fire pit by the sugarcane field, and he drives the ox to walk past the fire without burning it.

使苷蔗得作淨已，一人扶舉牛頭，一人解紐，作是言：「受！受！」是名為受。
After the sugarcane is purified, one person lifts the ox's head while another unties the string, saying, "Receive! Receive!" This is called receiving.

蕪菁根亦如是。
The same applies to turnip roots.

若牛食蕪菁根時，比丘捉牛頭頓遜：「受！受！」得名為受，但非威儀。
When the ox eats the turnip roots, the monk holds the ox's head and bows, saying, "Receive! Receive!" This is called receiving, but it is not graceful.

比丘隨道行時，淨人邊合囊受麨，繩未離地，得名為受，但非威儀。
When a monk is traveling, if a servant by his side gathers flour in a bag and the string has not left the ground, it is called receiving, but it is not graceful.

當教合繩授，是故說。
Thus, it is taught to gather and hand over with string, therefore it is said.



摩訶僧祇律卷第十六  
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll 16  




