orry, I can't assist with that request


 please provide the lines that you want translated


#【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

# [Version History] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




#【编辑说明】本数据库由 财团法人佛教电子佛典基金会（CBETA）依「大正新修大藏经」所编辑

# [Editorial Note] This database is edited by the Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taisho New Edited Tripitaka".




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供

[Original Data] Provided by Great Virtue Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by Gayasan Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a Great Virtue from North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchan with New Style Punctuation




#其他事項 

Other Matters

本資料庫可自由免費流通 

This database can be freely circulated free of charge

詳細內容請參閱 

For details, please refer to

【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】 

"Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration"




orry, it seems there might have been a misunderstanding in the formatting or content provided. Could you please provide the lines you want translated


義不應於村內激箭

It is not appropriate to shoot arrows within the village.

一

One

不應於村內激箭

It is not appropriate to shoot arrows within the village.

二

Two

不應於村內射箭

It is not appropriate to shoot arrows within the village.

三

Three



明者兮察路 
The wise observe the path

雜疑兮不定 
Doubt and confusion lead to indecision

誦舊兮樂新 
Recite the old while enjoying the new

跋涉兮行遠 
Travel far by treading slowly

渠多兮力少 
With many channels, strength diminishes

法隨兮道進 
Adhere to the method to progress along the path

之謂兮三章 
Thus is said in these three principles



衛城，爾時阿梨吒比丘謗契經，作是說言：「長老！世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。」
Again, the Buddha resided in Śrāvastī, at which time the monk Arittha slandered the sūtras, saying, "Elder! I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path."

諸比丘語言：「長老！莫謗契經，謗契經者是惡邪見，墮惡道入泥犁中。」
The monks said, "Elder! Do not slander the sūtras, for those who do have evil misguided views and will fall into the hell of suffering."

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見。」
He replied, "These are good views, correct views, passed down from my parents and former teachers."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是阿梨吒比丘作是說：『世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。』應屏處三諫、多人中三諫、眾僧中三諫。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "This monk Arittha claims, 'I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path.' He should be admonished three times in private, in front of a group, and in the assembly."

屏處諫者，應先問：「長老阿梨吒！汝實謗契經，作是說：『世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。』耶？」
For admonishment in private, one should first ask, "Elder Arittha! Do you indeed slander the sūtras by saying, 'I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path?'"

答言：「實爾。」
He should answer, "Indeed."

爾時屏處應諫，作是言：「長老！莫謗契經，謗契經者，此是惡邪見，墮惡道入泥犁。
Then he should be admonished in private, saying, "Elder! Do not slander the sūtras, as having evil misguided views leads to the hell of suffering."

我慈心饒益故諫汝，汝當捨此事。一諫已過二諫在，捨此事不？」
With compassion and for your benefit, I admonish you. Will you abandon this matter after the first admonishment?"

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」
He should answer, "These are good views, correct views, passed down from my parents and former teachers, and I cannot give them up."

如是二諫、三諫不止。
Similarly, after the second and third admonishments, he does not stop.

如是眾多人中三諫。
Three admonishments are to be given in front of a group.

若不捨者，僧中應作羯磨。
If he does not give up, a formal act of discipline should be performed in the assembly.

羯磨人應作如是說：「大德僧聽！是阿梨吒比丘謗契經，作是說：『世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。』已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫不捨。
The officiant should say, "Venerable assembly, listen! This monk Arittha slanders the sūtras by claiming, 'I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path.' He has not given up after three admonishments in private and in front of a group.

若僧時到，僧亦應三諫。」僧中應問：「長老！汝實謗契經，作是說：『世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。』已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫，不捨此事耶？」
If the time for the assembly is reached, the assembly should also admonish him three times and ask, "Elder! Do you indeed slander the sūtras by saying, 'I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path?' You have not given up this matter after three admonishments in private and before a group?"

答言：「爾。」
He should answer, "Yes."

僧中應諫：「長老！汝莫謗契經。
The assembly should admonish, "Elder! Do not slander the sūtras.

謗契經者，此是惡邪見，墮惡道入泥犁。
Slandering the sūtras is an evil misguided view, leading to the hell of suffering."

僧今慈心饒益故諫汝。
With a compassionate heart, the assembly admonishes you for your benefit.

一諫已過二諫在，捨此事不？」
After the first admonishment, will you abandon this matter?"

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」
He should answer, "These are good views, correct views, passed down from my parents and former teachers, and I cannot give them up."

如是第二、第三諫不止。
After the second and third admonishments, he still does not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是阿梨吒比丘謗契經，已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫，不捨者，僧應作謗契經不捨舉羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "If this monk Arittha slanders the sūtras, after being admonished three times in private and before a group without giving up, the assembly should perform a formal act declaring his refusal to abandon slandering the sūtras."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！
The officiant should say, "Venerable assembly, listen!

是阿梨吒比丘謗契經，作是說：『世尊說法我解知，行障道法不能障道。
This monk Arittha slanders the sūtras, saying, 'I understand the Buddha's teachings, and obstacles cannot hinder the path.'

』已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫、眾僧中三諫而不捨。
He has not given up after three admonishments in private, before a group, and in the assembly.

若僧時到，僧今與阿梨吒比丘作謗契經不捨舉羯磨。白如是。
If the time of the assembly arrives, the assembly will perform a formal act declaring Monk Arittha's refusal to abandon slandering the sūtras. So it is declared."

如是白三羯磨。
The formal act is declared three times


復次佛住舍衛城，爾時尸利耶婆惡邪見起，作是說：「殺生、自殺、教人殺，乃至作惡無殃，為善無福，無今世後世善惡果報。」

Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, when at that time, Cīryaba's wrong views arose, saying: "Killing, self-killing, instructing others to kill, up to doing evil without retribution, doing good without merit, and there are no results of good or bad in this life or the next."

諸比丘言：「長老！尸利耶婆莫起惡見，起惡見者，是不善，墮惡道入泥犁。」

The monks said, "Elder! Do not hold wrongful views, Cīryaba. Holding wrongful views is unwholesome, leading one down the evil path into hells."

答言：「此是好見，善見，我父母、先師相承已來作如是見。」

He replied, "These are good views, right views, inherited from my parents and former teachers who have always held such views."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, using this as a cause, went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「是尸利耶婆起惡邪見，乃至無善惡果報應。」

The Buddha said, "Cīryaba has arisen a bad and wrong view, which includes no result of good or bad actions."

屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫、僧中三諫。

Admonish him three times privately, three times among many people, and three times within the Sangha.

屏處三諫者，應先問：「長老尸利耶婆！汝實起惡邪見，作是說：『殺生、自殺、教人殺，乃至作惡無殃為善無福、無今世後世善惡果報。』耶？」

To admonish him privately three times, one should first ask, "Elder Cīryaba! Have you truly raised a wrong view, saying: 'Killing, self-killing, instructing others to kill, up to doing evil without retribution, doing good without merit, and no result of good or bad in this life or the next?'"

答言：「爾。」

He will reply, "Yes."

是時應諫言：「長老！莫起惡邪見。起惡邪見者，是不善，墮惡道入泥梨。」

At this time, you should admonish saying, "Elder! Do not raise wrong views. Raising wrong views is unwholesome, leading one down the evil path into hells."

我今慈心饒益汝故諫汝。一諫已過二諫在，捨是見不？

I now admonish you with a kind heart to benefit you. After one admonishment, there are two left; will you abandon these views?

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」

He replies, "These are good views, right views, inherited from my parents and former teachers. I cannot abandon them."

如是第二、第三諫不止、眾多人中三諫。

In the same way, if the second and third admonishments do not stop, [admonish] three times among many people.

如是不止者，僧中應作舉羯磨。

If this does not stop, the Sangha should perform a declaration of karma.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是尸利耶婆起惡邪見，作是說：『殺生、自殺、教人殺，乃至作惡無殃為善無福，無今世後世善惡果報。』已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫而不捨。

The one performing karma should say, "Venerable Sangha, please listen. Cīryaba has raised a wrong view, saying: 'Killing, self-killing, instructing others to kill, up to doing evil without retribution, doing good without merit, and there are no results of good or bad in this life or the next.' He has been admonished three times privately and three times among many people and has not relinquished this view.

若僧時到，僧今應三諫。」

If the time for the Sangha has arrived, the Sangha should presently give three admonishments."

是時僧中應問：「長老尸利耶婆！汝實作是說：『殺生、自殺、教人殺，乃至作惡無殃、為善無福，無今世後世善惡果報。』已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫，不捨此事耶？」

At this time, the Sangha should ask, "Elder Cīryaba! Did you truly say: 'Killing, self-killing, instructing others to kill, up to doing evil without retribution, doing good without merit, and there are no results of good or bad in this life or the next.'? You have been admonished three times privately and three times among many people, and have not abandoned this matter?"

答言：「實爾！」

He replies, "Indeed!"

僧中應諫：「長老！汝莫起惡邪見，此是不善，墮惡道入泥犁中。

The Sangha should admonish, "Elder! Do not raise wrong views. This is unwholesome, leading one down the evil path into hells."

眾僧慈心欲饒益故諫汝。一諫已過二諫在，捨此見不？」

The entire Sangha, with a kind heart wishing to benefit, admonishes you. One admonishment has passed, two remain; will you abandon this view?"

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」

He replies, "These are good views, right views, inherited from my parents and former teachers. I cannot abandon them."

如是一諫不止，乃至三諫不止。

As in the first admonishment, if it does not stop, up to the third admonishment, it does not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, using this as a reason, go to report to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是尸利耶婆起惡邪見，三諫不止，僧應與作不捨惡邪見舉羯磨。」

The Buddha tells the monks, "Cīryaba has raised a wrong view and does not stop after three admonishments. The Sangha should perform a karma declaration for not abandoning wrongful views."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是尸利耶婆比丘起惡邪見，已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫，眾僧中三諫不止。

The person performing karma should say, "Venerable Sangha, please listen. Bhikkhu Cīryaba has raised a wrong view, has received three admonishments privately, three admonishments among many people, and three admonishments within the Sangha, but does not stop.

若僧時到，僧今與尸利耶婆作不捨惡邪見舉羯磨。白如是。

If the moment for the Sangha has arrived, the Sangha now declares the karma for Bhikkhu Cīryaba's not abandoning the wrongful views. The declaration is thus made.

白三羯磨，乃至僧忍默然故，是事如是持。

Making the karma declaration three times, and with the Sangha's approval in silent consent, the matter is thus upheld.



衛城，爾時摩樓伽子比丘起邊見，作是說：「世界有邊、世界無邊。」

Again, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, at that time, the monk Malukya arose with the view, saying: "The world has an edge, the world is endless."

諸比丘言：「長老！莫起邊見，此是惡見，墮惡道入泥犁。」

The monks said, "Elder! Do not hold the view of extremes. This is an evil view that leads to a bad path descending into hell."

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」

He replied, "This is a good view, a proper view passed down from my parents and previous teachers, so I cannot discard it."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, due to this reason, went to inform the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「是摩樓伽子比丘起邊見，作是說：『世界有邊、世界無邊。』

The Buddha told the monks, "This monk Malukya has arisen with the extremist view, saying: 'The world is finite, the world is infinite.'"

應屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫、眾僧中三諫。」

"One should admonish him privately three times, among a group of many people three times, and among the assembly of monks three times."

屏處諫者，應問：「長老！汝實起邊見，作是說：『世界有邊、世界無邊。』耶？」

In private admonishment, one should ask, "Elder! Do you truly hold the extreme view, saying: 'The world is finite, the world is infinite'?"

答言：「實爾。」

He answers, "Indeed."

爾時應諫言：「長老！此是惡見，墮惡道入泥犁。我今慈心饒益故諫汝。

Then one should admonish him, "Elder! This is an evil view that leads to a bad path descending into hell. I now admonish you out of kindness and benefit."

一諫已過二諫在，捨此見不？」

"With one admonishment past and a second pending, will you give up this view?"

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」

He answers, "This is a good view, a correct view as inherited from my parents and previous teachers, and I cannot abandon it."

如是第二、第三諫不止。

Thus, the second and third admonishments are also ineffective.

眾多人中亦如是三諫。

Among a group of many people, likewise, there are three admonishments.

若不止者，僧中應作舉羯磨。

If not heeded, the assembly of monks should conduct the process of determination.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是摩樓伽子比丘起邊見，說世界有邊、世界無邊。

The one conducting the determination should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! This monk Malukya has arisen with the extreme view, saying the world has edges and boundaries."

已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫不止。

He has not changed after three private admonishments and three collective admonishments."

若僧時到，僧亦應三諫。」

"When the time is right for the assembly, the assembly should also admonish three times."

僧中應先問：「長老！汝實起邊見，說世界有邊世界無邊。

The assembly should first ask, "Elder! Do you indeed have the extreme view, saying the world is finite and infinite?"

已屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫，不捨此見耶？」

"Having been admonished three times privately and three times among a group, have you not abandoned this view?"

答言：「實爾。」

He answers, "Indeed."

爾時應僧中諫：「長老！莫起邊見，此是惡見，墮惡道入泥犁。

At that time, the assembly should admonish, "Elder! Do not maintain this extreme view, as it is an evil view leading to the path of suffering."

僧慈心饒益故諫汝。

"The assembly admonishes you out of kindness and benefit."

一諫已過二諫在，捨此見不？」

"With one admonishment past and the second pending, will you give up this view?"

答言：「此是好見、善見，父母、先師相承已來作如是見，我不能捨。」

He answers, "This is a good view, a positive view, as taught by parents and previous masters, and I cannot abandon it."

如是第二、第三諫不止。

Thus, the second and third admonishments do not work.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「以是摩樓伽子比丘起邊見，已屏處、眾多人中三諫不止者，僧應與作不捨邊見舉羯磨。」

The Buddha told the monks, "Because the monk Malukya adheres to an extreme view and has ignored three private and three public admonishments, the assembly should conduct a determination for not abandoning the view."

如上說，是名舉羯磨。

As said above, this is called the process of determination.


，爾時尸利耶婆比丘數數犯僧伽婆尸沙罪，語諸比丘言：「長老！與我摩那埵。」
When the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, at that time, the monk Chiriya repeatedly committed the Sanghadisesa offense and said to the monks, "Elders! Grant me probation."

諸比丘問言：「長老！何故索摩那埵？」
The monks asked, "Elder! Why do you seek probation?"

答言：「我犯僧伽婆尸沙罪。」
He replied, "I have committed a Sanghadisesa offense."

諸比丘先知數數犯僧伽婆尸沙罪，語言：「長老尸利耶婆！僧和合集作羯磨難，長老所犯一切盡說，當一時作羯磨。」
The monks, knowing he repeatedly committed the Sanghadisesa offense, said, "Elder Chiriya! It is difficult for the assembly to proceed with the ritual. Please confess everything you have committed at once for the ritual to take place."

如是第二、第三，答言：「我正犯是罪。」
This was repeated a second and third time, and he replied, "I have indeed committed this offense."

作羯磨已，作是念：「我何故再作羯磨？應一切盡說、一時作羯磨。」
After completing the ceremony, he thought, "Why should I undergo the ritual again? I should confess everything at once for the ceremony."

語諸比丘言：「長老！與我摩那埵。」
He said to the monks, "Elders! Grant me probation."

諸比丘問言：「何故復索摩那埵？」
The monks asked, "Why do you seek probation again?"

答言：「我犯僧伽婆尸沙罪。」
He replied, "I have committed a Sanghadisesa offense."

諸比丘問：「長老！何時犯？」
The monks asked, "Elder! When did you commit it?"

答言：「爾時犯。」
He replied, "At that time."

諸比丘言：「我先已語長老，僧和合集作羯磨難，長老所犯一切盡說，當一時作羯磨。爾時何故不說？」
The monks said, "I had already told the Elder, it's difficult for the assembly to perform the ritual. Please confess everything at once for the ritual. Why didn't you say it at that time?"

答言：「我慚愧故，不盡說。」
He replied, "Out of shame, I did not confess fully."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks recounted this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼尸利耶婆來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Chiriya to come here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
Once he arrived, the Buddha asked him about the matter, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛言：「癡人！犯時不知羞慚，求清淨時何以羞慚？此是惡事，非法非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha said, "Foolish man! You did not feel ashamed when you committed the offense, why feel ashamed when seeking purification? This is an evil deed, not in accordance with the Dharma nor discipline, not as per the Buddha's teaching, it cannot nurture wholesome qualities."



佛告諸比丘：「持律比丘與他出罪時，他語有罪亦知、無罪亦知、覆亦知、不覆亦知、發露亦知、不發露亦知；

The Buddha told the monks, "When a discipline-observing monk addresses another's offense, he knows when there is an offense and when there is not, knows concealment and non-concealment, knows confession and non-confession;

應與別住亦知、不應與別住亦知、如法與別住亦知、不如法與別住亦知、如法行波利婆沙亦知、不如法行波利婆沙亦知、

He knows whether segregation should be imposed or not, knows whether it is in accordance with the law or not, knows if the disciplinary isolation is conducted lawfully or unlawfully;

中間有罪亦知、中間無罪亦知、夜斷亦知、夜不斷亦知、隨順行亦知、不隨順行亦知；

He knows if there is an intermediate offense or not, knows whether the action was interrupted at night or not, knows if conduct is in accordance with the rules or not;

應與摩那埵亦知、不應與摩那埵亦知、如法與摩那埵亦知、不如法與摩那埵亦知、究竟摩那埵亦知、不究竟摩那埵亦知、

He knows if a probation should be imposed or not, knows whether it is lawful or not, knows if the probation is final or not;

中間有罪亦知、中間無罪亦知、夜斷亦知、夜不斷亦知、隨順行亦知、不隨順行亦知；

He knows if there is an intermediate offense or not, knows whether the action was interrupted at night or not, knows if conduct is in accordance with the rules or not;

應與阿浮呵那亦知、不應與亦知、如法與阿浮呵那亦知、不如法與亦知、共覆亦知、不共覆亦知、無量覆亦知、

He knows if an assembly should be convened or not, knows whether it is lawful or not, knows collective concealment, non-collective concealment, and infinite concealment;

比舍遮脚亦知、或有罪合非夜合、或有夜合非罪合、或有罪合夜亦合、或有非罪合非夜合本罪中間罪。

He knows the Vinaya penalties, whether there is a combination offense not at night, or a night offense not combined, or both crime and night combine, or neither crime nor night but only an intermediate offense.

比丘成就四法，名為持律。何等四？知罪、知無罪、知重、知輕，是名四法。

A monk fulfills four qualities, called discipline observance. What four? Knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, knowing grave, knowing minor; these are called four qualities.

復成就四法，名為持律：知罪、知無罪、不以重罪作輕、不以輕罪作重，是名四法。

Moreover, fulfilling four qualities called discipline observance: knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, not considering grave offenses as minor, not considering minor offenses as grave; these are called four qualities.

復成就四法：知罪、知無罪、無罪人不言有罪、有罪人不言無罪，是名四法。

Furthermore, accomplishing four qualities: knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, not declaring the non-offender as offender, not declaring the offender as non-offender; these are called four qualities.

復成就四法：不以重作輕、不以輕作重、不以不犯罪人作犯罪、不以犯罪人作不犯罪，是名四。

Moreover, achieving four qualities: not making heavy offenses light, nor light offenses heavy, not regarding the non-offender as offender, not regarding the offender as non-offender; these are called four.

復成就五法，名為持律：善知諍、善知諍緣起處、善知斷諍事、善知斷諍分別、善知斷諍滅止，是名五。

Additionally, accomplishing five qualities, called discipline observance: well understanding disputes, knowing their origin, knowing how to cease disputes, knowing how to differentiate disputes, knowing how to extinguish disputes; these are called five.

復成就六法，即上五事更增善斷諍結集，是名六。

Further fulfilling six qualities, that is, in addition to the above five matters, knowing well how to end disputes collectively; these are called six.

復成就七法：知罪、知無罪、知重、知輕、不以重罪作輕、不以輕罪作重、善知羯磨，是名七。

Also accomplishing seven qualities: knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, knowing grave, knowing minor, not making grave offenses light nor light offenses grave, well understanding formal acts; these are called seven.

復成就八法，即上七事更增善誦波羅提木叉、廣略毘尼識知緣起，是名八。

Moreover, fulfilling eight qualities: besides the above seven matters, adding proficient recitation of the Pratimoksha, knowing fully and concisely the Vinaya's origin; these are called eight.

復成就九法。何等九？即上八事更增善誦毘尼、善知義不妄見徹、善知羯磨，是名九。

Further achieving nine qualities. What nine? In addition to the above eight matters, proficiently reciting the Vinaya, clearly understanding meaning without false views, well comprehending formal acts; these are called nine.

復成就十法，即上九事更增善調伏諸根梵行滿足，深知羯磨是名十。

Moreover, fulfilling ten qualities, which include the above nine and additionally excelling in restraining the faculties, fulfilling holy conduct, and deeply understanding formal acts; these are called ten.

復成就五法，名為持律。何等五？持戒、知罪、知無罪、誦波羅提木叉、略廣義知其緣起、善知羯磨，是名五。

In addition, achieving five qualities, called discipline observance. What five? Maintaining precepts, knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, reciting the Pratimoksha, broadly and concisely understanding its origin, well understanding formal acts; these are called five.

復成就四法。何等四？持戒、善知罪、善知無罪、善知羯磨，是名四。

Furthermore, accomplishing four qualities. What four? Keeping precepts, well knowing offenses, well knowing non-offenses, well knowing formal acts; these are called four.

復成就三法：知罪、知無罪、知羯磨，是名三。

Further fulfilling three qualities: knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, knowing formal acts; these are called three.

復成就二法。何等二？知罪、知無罪，是名二。

Also achieving two qualities. What two? Knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses; these are called two.

復成就一法。何等一？善知羯磨，是名持律。

Realizing one quality. What one? Well understanding formal acts; this is named discipline observance.

乃至成就十四法，是名持律最第一，除如來、應供、正遍知。

Achieving up to fourteen qualities, this is named the foremost discipline observance, except for the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One.

何等十四？知罪、知無罪、知重、知輕、知覆、知不覆、知可治、知不可治、

What are these fourteen? Knowing offenses, knowing non-offenses, knowing grave, knowing minor, knowing concealment, knowing non-concealment, knowing what can be rectified, knowing what cannot be rectified,

知得清淨、知不得清淨、得四禪功德住現法樂、得天眼天耳宿命通、盡有漏、得無漏，

Knowing achievement of purity, knowing lack of purity, attaining the four jhanas residing in the happiness of the present law, possessing divine eye and ear, remote memory, exhaustion of asavas, attainment of no asavas;

是名十四法，一切持律中最第一，除如來、應供、正遍知。」

These are called the fourteen qualities, the foremost amongst all discipline observance, except for the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One."



佛告諸比丘：「優波離比丘成就是十四法，持律第一，有罪亦知，無罪亦知，乃至盡有漏得無漏慧解脫。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Upali, the monk, accomplished in fourteen practices, is foremost in the observance of rules, knowing both transgressions and innocence, and ultimately achieves the liberation of wisdom free from impurities."

有罪亦知者，知五眾罪：波羅夷、僧伽婆尸沙、波夜提、波羅提提舍尼、越毘尼。
Knowing transgressions means knowing the five groups of offenses: Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Patidesaniya, and Dukkata.




波羅夷者，婬、盜、斷人命、自稱過人法。
Parajika, which refers to offenses such as sexual misconduct, theft, murder, and falsely claiming spiritual attainments.




僧伽婆尸沙者，故出精、相觸、惡口語，乃至聚落中污他家。
The monk who commits sexual misconduct, impure contact, or harsh speech, even in the village, defiles the home of others.




波夜提者，三十尼薩耆、九十二純波夜提波羅提。  
A Pātayantika, for the third time, is thirty Niḥsargika and ninety-two Pātayantika Prājñāptis.




在阿练若处无病的比丘尼向提舍尼取食。

At the residence of Aranyaka, the healthy Bhikkhuni took food from Tisani.

比丘尼指示她们如何用斋。

The Bhikkhuni showed them how to use alms.

她们向学者拜学。

They paid homage to scholars for learning.




越毘尼者，有十三事：
Overcoming the Vinaya involves thirteen matters:

阿遮與、
Accusation,

偷蘭遮、
Theft,

醜偷蘭、
Ugly theft,

不作、
Non-performance,

不語、
Silence,

突吉羅、
Transgression,

惡聲、
Evil speech,

威儀、
Conduct,

非威儀、
Improper conduct,

惡威儀、
Evil conduct,

惡邪命、
Evil livelihood,

惡見、
Evil view,

心生悔毘尼。
Arising remorse in the Vinaya.




如外道須深摩

Like the heretic Sudhamma

如尊者跋陀梨

Like the venerable Bhadāli

如王舍城比丘尼

Like the Bhikkhuni of Rajagaha

如是比向佛悔過

Similarly, compares seeking absolution from the Buddha

是名阿遮與

This is called Ācārya.



偷蘭遮者，盜減五錢、動五錢物不離地，是名偷蘭遮。
A person who commits 'stealth removal', stealing property worth five qian or causing five qian worth of property to move without leaving the ground, is known as a stealth remover.




醜偷蘭者，染污心弄身生，是名醜偷蘭。
Those who steal beauty and secretly defile the heart and body are called ugly thieves of beauty.




不作者，和上、阿闍梨語作是事，共法中應作，若不作者，越毘尼罪。
Not acting, speaking to the elder and the Acharya, this matter should be done according to the Dharma; if not, it violates the Vinaya rules.

若語：「喚婦人來、取酒來。」應語和上、阿闍梨：「我聞法中不得作。」
If someone says, "Call the woman, bring the wine," you should tell the elder and the Acharya: "I heard that this should not be done according to the Dharma."

是名不作。
This is called not doing.



不語者，和上、阿闍梨共語，聞而不報者，越毘尼罪。
If a novice does not speak with the superior or teacher and doesn't reply when spoken to, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

若口中有食，若能使聲不異者，應答；若不能者，咽已然後答。
If there is food in the mouth, one should respond if it is possible to speak without distortion; if not, they should swallow first and then respond.

若和上、阿闍梨作是語：「何以聞我語而不應？」
If the superior or teacher says, "Why do you hear my words and not respond?"

應語和上、阿闍梨：「我口中有食，是故不得答。」
They should respond to the superior or teacher, "I had food in my mouth, therefore I could not respond."

是名不語。
This is called silent.



突吉羅者，如世尊語優陀夷、六群比丘，及餘比丘等：「作是事不好。」

Transgression refers to when the Blessed One said to Udāyin, the group of six monks, and other monks: "Doing this thing is not good."

是名突吉羅。

This is called "transgression."




惡聲者，作象聲、馬聲、牛驢、駱駝，如是等一切畜生聲；

The evil sounds are the noises of elephants, horses, cattle, donkeys, camels, and all such animal sounds;

長引促斷、促引長斷，是名惡聲。

Prolonged or short and sudden, these are called evil sounds.




威儀者，晨起當除洗大小便行處，
Proper conduct involves cleaning the places for relieving oneself upon waking.

當益大小行處甕水，
The water urns in these places should be replenished.

應當掃塔院僧坊院，
The stupas and monastery courtyards should be swept.

若取與作事，乃至紐一線不白和上、依止阿闍梨者，
If anything is taken or any work is done, even as small as threading a needle, without informing the abbot or residing preceptor,

越毘尼罪，是名威儀。
it constitutes a Vinaya offense, and this is called proper conduct.




非威儀者，治髮莊眼，

Not observing proper conduct includes styling hair and adorning eyes,

作好色擣衣，

wearing brightly colored clothes,

光生帛帶繫腰，

bright silk sashes tied at the waist,

熏鉢光現以鏡照面，

applying fragrant makeup and looking in the mirror,

是名非威儀。

this is called not observing proper conduct.




惡威儀者，身惡威儀、口惡威儀、身口惡威儀，身害、口害、身口害，身邪命、口邪命、身口邪命，是名惡威儀。
Improper demeanor is characterized by improper bodily actions, improper speech, both improper bodily actions and speech, causing harm by body, causing harm by speech, causing harm by both body and speech, wrong livelihood by body, wrong livelihood by speech, wrong livelihood by both body and speech; this is called improper demeanor.




惡邪命者，身曲、口曲、心曲、現親愛希望供養，是名惡邪命。
One who leads a wrong and deceitful life has a crooked body, crooked speech, and crooked mind, all while pretending kindness to seek offerings; this is known as leading a wrong and deceitful life.




惡見者，斷、常等一切諸見，是名惡見。
The wrong view is all the views of permanence, annihilation, and similar, which are called wrong views.




心生悔毘尼者，眾學威儀心念惡、不故觸女人，如是比皆名心悔，是名心生悔毘尼。
Those who feel regret in their hearts, who, while learning the rules of discipline, harbor evil thoughts, and do not intentionally touch women, are said to have regret in their hearts, which is called mental remorse discipline.




復次或有罪從欲生
Furthermore, some transgressions stem from desire,

或有罪從瞋恚生
or some transgressions stem from anger,

或有罪從愚癡生
or some transgressions stem from ignorance,

或有罪不從欲、瞋恚、愚癡生
or some transgressions do not stem from desire, anger, or ignorance,

或有罪是身行非口行
or some transgressions are actions of the body and not of speech,

或是口行非身行
or are actions of speech and not of the body,

或是身口行
or are both body and speech actions,

或非身口行
or are neither actions of the body nor speech,

或有罪從自身生非他身
or some transgressions arise from oneself, not another,

或從他身生非自身
or from another, not oneself,

或從自身他身生
or from both oneself and another,

或非自身非他身生
or neither from oneself nor another,

或有罪從自口生非他口
or some transgressions arise from one's own mouth, not another's,

或有從他口非自口
or from another's, not one's own,

或從自口亦從他口
or from both one's own and another's,

或非自口非他口
or neither from one's own nor another's,

或有罪取心不取事
or some transgressions concern the mind and not actions,

或有罪取事不取心
or concern actions and not the mind,

或有罪事重非心重
or the action is serious, not the mind's intent,

或有心重非事重
or the mind's intent is serious, not the action,

或有事重心亦重
or both the action and mindset are serious,

或有非事重非心重
or neither the action nor the mind is serious,

或有罪自物非他物
or some transgressions involve one's own property, not another's, 

或有他物非自物
or involve another's property, not one's own,  

或自物亦他物
or involve both one's own and another's property,

或有非自物非他物
or neither involve one's own nor another's property,

或有罪是一處犯眾多
or a single place involves multiple transgressions,

或有眾多處犯一罪
or multiple places involve a single transgression,

或有眾多處犯眾多罪
or multiple places involve multiple transgressions,

或有一處犯一罪
or a single place involves a single transgression,

或緣無罪至有罪
or conditions change from not being a transgression to being one,

或緣有罪至無罪
or change from being a transgression to not being one,

或緣有罪至有罪
or change from one form of transgression to another,

或緣無罪至無罪
or remain continuously not a transgression,

或有罪重而緣輕
or a serious transgression with slight circumstances,

或有罪輕而緣重
or a slight transgression with serious circumstances,

或有罪重緣亦重
or both transgression and circumstances are serious,

或有罪輕緣亦輕
or both transgression and circumstances are slight,

有受時罪
there are transgressions related to acceptance,

有食時罪
transgressions related to eating time,

事成罪
transgressions upon completion of an action,

不受得罪
transgressions for not accepting,

受無罪
no transgression in acceptance,

不與得罪
transgressions for not giving,

與無罪
no transgression in giving,

或有罪是聚落非阿練若
or some transgressions occur in a village, not in solitude,

或有是阿練若非聚落
or in solitude, not in a village,

或有是聚落亦阿練若
or in both village and solitude,

或有非聚落亦非阿練若
or neither in village nor solitude,

或有罪是時非非時
or some transgressions occur timely, not untimely,

或是非時非是時
or untimely, not timely,

或是時亦非時
or both timely and untimely,

或有罪亦非是時亦非非時
or neither timely nor untimely,

或有罪是夜非晝
or some transgressions occur at night, not in the day,

或有罪是晝非夜
or in the day, not at night,

或有罪是夜亦是晝
or occur both at night and in the day,

或有罪亦非夜亦非晝
or neither at night nor in the day,

或有罪是覆處非露處
or some transgressions occur in covered places, not exposed ones,

或有罪是露處非覆處
or in exposed places, not covered ones,

或有罪亦是覆處亦是露處
or in both covered and exposed places,

或有罪亦非覆處亦非露處
or neither in covered nor exposed places,

或有罪是行非住
or some transgressions occur while moving, not while staying,

或有罪是住非行
or while staying, not moving,

或有罪亦是行亦是住
or both while moving and staying,

或有罪亦非行亦非住
or neither while moving nor staying,

或有罪是住非坐
or some transgressions occur while standing, not sitting,

或是坐非住
or sitting, not standing,

或是坐是住
or both sitting and standing,

或非坐非住
or neither sitting nor standing,

或有罪是坐非眠
or some transgressions occur while sitting, not sleeping,

或是眠非坐
or sleeping, not sitting,

或是坐是眠
or both sitting and sleeping,

或非坐非眠
or neither sitting nor sleeping,

或有罪是眠非行
or some transgressions occur while sleeping, not moving,

或是行非眠
or moving, not sleeping,

或亦是行亦是眠
or both moving and sleeping,

或非眠非行
or neither sleeping nor moving,

或有罪是屏處非眾多
or some transgressions occur in seclusion, not among many,

或是眾多非屏處
or among many, not in seclusion,

或亦是屏處亦是眾多
or both in seclusion and among many,

或非屏處亦非眾多
or neither in seclusion nor among many,

或有罪是眾多非僧中
or some transgressions occur among many, not in the Sangha,

或是僧中非眾多
or in the Sangha, not among many,

或亦是眾多亦是僧中
or both among many and in the Sangha,

或非眾多亦非僧中
or neither among many nor in the Sangha,

或有罪是僧中非屏處
or some transgressions occur in the Sangha, not in seclusion,

或是屏處非僧中
or in seclusion, not in the Sangha,

或是僧中亦是屏處
or both in the Sangha and in seclusion,

或非僧中非屏處
or neither in the Sangha nor in seclusion,

或有罪是冬非春
or some transgressions occur in winter, not spring,

或是春非冬
or in spring, not winter,

或亦是冬亦是春
or both in winter and spring,

或亦非冬亦非春
or neither in winter nor spring,

或有罪是春非夏
or some transgressions occur in spring, not summer,

或是夏非春
or in summer, not spring,

或亦是春亦是夏
or both in spring and summer,

或有亦非春亦非夏
or neither in spring nor summer,

或有罪是夏非冬
or some transgressions occur in summer, not winter,

或是冬非夏
or in winter, not summer,

或亦是夏亦是冬
or both in summer and winter,

或亦非夏亦非冬
or neither in summer nor winter.



有罪從欲生者，

The sin arises from desire.

故弄身生、摩觸、惡口、自稱、媒嫁、一切染污心語，

Thus, it leads to physical actions, contact, harsh speech, self-praise, matchmaking, and all tainted thoughts and words.

是名從欲生。

This is known as arising from desire.




有罪從瞋恚生者

Guilt arises from anger

無根謗

Baseless slander

毀呰

Defamation

兩舌

Double-tongued speech

鬪亂

Creating chaos

驅出

Expulsion

知食已足故惱

Annoyance knowing one's fill

聚落驅出

Expulsion from the community

拳打

Punching

手擬

Gesturing with hands

屏處聽等

Listening in private

是名從瞋恚生

These are said to arise from anger



有罪從愚癡生者，

Guilt arises from ignorance.

愚癡心謂真實世界有常、

An ignorant mind believes there is permanence in the real world,

世界無常，如是一切見，

The world is impermanent, and such is the view,

是名從愚癡生。

This is called arising from ignorance.




有罪非欲瞋恚愚癡生者，
The guilt arises not from desire, anger, or ignorance,

阿羅漢犯，
The Arahant commits,

是名非欲瞋恚愚癡生。
This is named not arising from desire, anger, or ignorance.




有罪是身非口者

There is guilt when the actions, not the words, are wrong.

女人同室、未受具足人過三宿、同床眠、同床坐、處處食、別眾食、同器食，是名身非口。

A woman sharing a room, someone who has not fully accepted, staying over for three nights, sleeping on the same bed, sitting together, eating everywhere, eating separately from the group, eating from the same vessel; these are called wrongful actions, not words.




有罪是口非身者，一切口跋渠，是名口非身。  
The guilty is in speech not in body, all is in speaking evil, this is called oral guilt.




有罪是身口者，
The guilt lies in the body and speech.

無根謗、
Groundless slander,

毀呰、
Revilement,

兩舌、
Double-tongued,

鬪亂、
Causing discord,

驅出、
Expulsion,

知食已足故惱、
Being dissatisfied knowing food is sufficient,

聚落驅出、
Expelled from the community,

拳打、
Fist fighting,

手擬、
Gesture of violence,

屏處聽等，
Listening secretly, etc.,

是名身口有罪。
This is called guilt of the body and speech.




非身口者

Not of body and speech

從心生

Arises from the heart

是名非身口。

Is called not of body and speech.




有罪從自身非他身者，瞋恚自打身，是名從自身非他身。
The faults lie within oneself, not in others. Anger harms oneself, hence it is said to stem from one's own nature and not from others.




有罪從他身非自身者，見他婬盜殺人覆藏，是名從他身非自身。
It is said to be a sin from another person, not oneself, when one witnesses others committing adultery, theft, murder, and concealment.




有罪從自身他身生者，

One commits a sin from oneself and through the body of another,

共女人同室宿、

to stay in the same room with a woman,

未受具足人過三宿、

if not fully ordained, to stay for more than three nights,

同床眠、

to sleep in the same bed,

同床坐、

to sit on the same bed,

處處食、

to eat everywhere,

別眾食、

to eat separately from the community,

同器食，

to eat from the same vessel,

是名從自身他身生。

this is called committing a sin from oneself and through the body of another.




有罪非自身非他身者，一切口跋渠，除未受具足人說句法，是名非自身非他身。
There are transgressions that neither belong to oneself nor to another, all verbal restraints, except the unordained person who recites verses of law; this is called "neither belonging to oneself nor to another."




有罪從自口非他口者，一切口罪，除未受具足人說句法，是名從自口非他口。
All offenses come from one's own mouth, not from the mouth of others. All verbal offenses, except for those who are not fully ordained, are called offenses from one's own mouth, not from another's.




有罪從他口非自口者

Guilt comes from another's mouth, not one's own.

若比丘僧中非法斷事、不與欲

If a monk unlawfully adjudicates issues within the Sangha, without desire,

復不與見不欲

nor does he associate with those who have no desire,

默然聽過

silently listening is permitted,

是名從他口非自口。

this is called coming from another's mouth, not one's own.




有罪從自口從他口者，與未受具足人說句法，是名從自口從他口。
The sin caused by one's own words or others' words is like speaking formal expressions to a person who has not received full ordination; this is known as the sin caused by one's own words or others'.




有罪非自口非他口者，從身心生。

Guilt that does not arise from one's own words or another's words, but comes from one's body and mind,

是名非自口非他口。

is called neither from one's own mouth nor another's mouth.




有罪取心不取事者，應當問：「以何心盜？

The guilt lies in the intent, not the act itself; one should ask: "With what intent do you steal?

何心殺人？

With what intent do you kill?

何心觸女人？

With what intent do you touch a woman?

何心斷生草？

With what intent do you cut living grass?

何心掘地？」

With what intent do you dig the earth?"

是名取心不取事。

This is called focusing on the intent, not the act itself.




有罪取事不取心者，不應問：「以何心婬？何心非時食？何心飲酒？何心與女人同室宿、未受具足人過三宿？」

For those who are guilty, focusing on the act rather than the heart, one should not ask: "With what mind did you indulge in desire? With what mind did you eat at improper times? With what mind did you drink alcohol? With what mind did you share a room with a woman overnight, or with someone not fully ordained for more than three nights?"

若犯者當如法治，是名取事不取心。

If one has transgressed, they should be dealt with according to the rules. This is called focusing on the act, not the heart.




有罪事重非心重者，比丘非時謂是時食者，波夜提，是名事重非心重。
There is an offense of serious matter but not a serious mind. If a monk eats at an inappropriate time, thinking it is the appropriate time, it is called a serious matter but not a serious mind.




有罪心重非事重者，比丘時謂非時食者，越毘尼罪，是名心重非事重。
The one who feels guilty thinks that things are more serious than they are; a monk eats at improper times and thus violates the Vinaya, meaning the mind sees it as heavier than it is.




有罪事重心亦重者，非時謂非時食者，波夜提，是名事重心亦重。
For those whose offenses are both grave in matters and intentions, eating at inappropriate times is termed "Pacittiya," which is known as both grave in matters and intentions.




有罪事輕心亦輕者，眾學及威儀，是名事輕心亦輕。
For offenses where the infraction and intent are both minor, it refers to study and conduct, which are called minor matters with minor mind.




有罪從自物生非他物者，
The sin arises from one's own possessions, not from another's possessions.

比丘自財物盜心取犯偷蘭遮，
A monk, with a mind to steal, takes his own possessions and violates the rule of discipline.

是名自物生非他物生。
This is called arising from one's own possessions, not from others.



有罪從他物非自物者，比丘盜心偷他物，減五錢偷蘭遮，滿五錢波羅夷，是名他物生非自物。

The sin arises from taking what belongs to others, not oneself; if a monk's intent to steal others' possessions is less than five coins, it is a minor offense, if it is more than five coins, it is a grave offense; this is called taking what belongs to others, not oneself.




有罪從自物他物生者，

A transgression arises from taking what belongs to oneself or others.

比丘共他物盜心取，

A monk, with intent to steal, takes something belonging to others.

減五錢偷蘭遮，

If it is less than five coins, it entails an offense requiring expiation.

滿者波羅夷，

If it amounts to five coins, it is a major offense, leading to expulsion.

是名從自物他物生。

This is called a transgression arising from taking one's or others' belongings.




有罪非自物非他物者，比丘盜心取無主物，越毘尼罪，是名非自物非他物。
The offense of a thing being neither one's own nor another's is when a monk with a theft-minded intent takes ownerless property, violating the Vinaya, this is called neither one's own nor another's.




有罪是一處犯眾多者，比丘一處并乞得八種好食，各各別食者，得八波夜提，是名一處犯眾多。

In one place where many offenses are committed, a monk receives eight types of good food in one place and each individual eating results in eight offenses, this is called numerous offenses in one place.




有眾多處犯一罪者，

There are many places where one commits an offense,

比丘眾多處乞，

Monks beg at many places,

得八種美食，

Receive eight kinds of fine food,

一坐食者得一波夜提，

Those who eat at one sitting receive one meal's portion,

是名眾多處犯一罪。

This is called committing one offense in many places.




有眾多處犯眾多者，

In many places, many offenses are committed.

比丘八處乞得八種美食，

A monk begs in eight places and receives eight kinds of delicacies,

各各食者，得八波夜提，

Eating each, he incurs eight offenses.

是名眾多處犯眾多罪。

This is called committing many offenses in many places.




一處犯一罪者，一處乞得八種美食，
In one place a guilty person, in one place begged and obtained eight kinds of delicacies,

一坐食，是名一處犯一罪。
eating in one sitting, this is called being guilty in one place.



緣無罪得有罪者
Those who are innocent but are deemed guilty

比丘無罪，作罪悔過
Monks are innocent, but they confess their faults

得越毘尼罪
To transgress the Vinaya offenses

是名緣無罪而得罪緣
This is known as being innocent but falling into guilt by circumstance.




有罪得無罪者

For those who are guilty but become innocent

作小房大房氈一切

build small and large tents and everything in between

乃至三諫

Up to giving three pieces of advice

是名緣有罪得無罪。

This is called guilty connections leading to innocence.




緣有罪至有罪者，僧中說波羅提木叉時，乃至三問，有罪者如法作，無罪者默然。
From a connection having a fault to one who is at fault, when the monks recite the Pātimokkha, they are asked up to three times, those at fault should confess according to the rule, those not at fault remain silent.

爾時有罪不如法作，復不語人，又不作念：「我待清淨同意人當如法作。」
Then, if someone at fault does not confess according to the rule, does not tell others, and does not think, "I will wait for a pure and agreeable person to act according to the rule,"

默然者，得越毘尼罪，是名緣有罪至有罪。
those who remain silent in such a way commit an offense of transgressing the Vinaya, this is called having a fault connected to the fault.




缘无罪得无罪者，不作不犯，是名缘无罪至无罪。
One who is innocent and gains innocence does nothing to break the law, this is called being led from innocence to innocence.




緣重至輕者，比丘犯波夜提，向惡邪邊見被舉人悔過，是名緣重至輕。
When the condition is heavy but the offense light, a monk commits an offense requiring confession; when one strays towards wrong views and is corrected, but repents, it is called a heavy condition becoming light.




比丘犯越毘尼罪  
A monk violates the monastic rules  

向謗線經被舉人悔過  
Slandered during a recitation and repented  

得波夜提  
Receives a formal admonition  

是名緣輕至重  
This is called a sin from light to serious  



緣重至重者，比丘犯波夜提，向謗線經被舉人悔過，得波夜提，是名緣重至重。

The more severe case arises when a monk commits a grave offense, criticizes the scriptures, gets censured by others, repents, and then incurs the offense again; this is known as the most severe case.




緣輕至輕者，比丘犯越毘尼罪，向未受具足人悔過，不名作，更得越毘尼罪，是名緣輕至輕。
For the lightest of light offenses, if a monk commits a sāṅghādisesa offense and confesses to one who has not fully ordained, it is not considered a formal confession, and he incurs a further sāṅghādisesa offense. This is called a "lightest of light offense."




受時罪者，受生肉、生穀、金銀、象馬、駝驢、牛羊、奴婢、婦女、田宅、屋舍，是名受時罪。
Those who commit timely sins receive raw meat, raw grains, gold and silver, elephants and horses, camels and donkeys, cattle and sheep, slaves, women, lands, and houses; this is called receiving timely sins.




有食時罪者，別眾食、處處食、同器食、不淨果食，是名食時罪。
For those who have the offense of eating at inappropriate times, it involves eating separately from others, eating everywhere, sharing food from the same container, or consuming impure fruit, this is called the offense of eating at inappropriate times.




事成罪者，作小房大房一切二諫，是名事成罪。
Committing an offense after the act, making small rooms, large rooms, and all things considered twice; this is called committing an offense after the act.




有不受得罪受無罪者，

There are those who accept no offense and receive no guilt.

受迦絺那衣，

They receive the Kaṭhina robe,

得捨五戒：

and are able to abandon the five precepts:

別眾食、

eating separately from the assembly,

處處食、

eating at various places,

離同食、

abstaining from eating together,

不白長衣、

not declaring long robes,

離衣宿，

not lodging with robes,

是名不受得罪受無罪。

this is called accepting no offense and receiving no guilt.




不與得罪與無罪者，
Not transgressing by giving to the innocent,

比丘得新衣，
A monk gets new robes,

不三種壞色，
Not in the three bad colors,

若一一壞色作淨受用者，
If receiving them requires purification of each,

波夜提，
It's a transgression,

是名不與得罪與無罪。
This is called not offending by giving to the innocent.




或有罪是聚落非阿練若者，不著僧伽梨入聚落、不著紐入聚落、不著繫腰繩、不持鉢、不白離同食、非時入聚落，是名聚落非阿練若。
If there is an offense, it is a settlement, not an Aranyaka; one does not wear the monk's robe to enter the settlement, does not wear a belt to enter the settlement, does not tie a waistband, does not carry a bowl, does not announce leaving communal eating, and enters the settlement at improper times, this is called a settlement, not an Aranyaka.




阿練若非聚落者，比丘與賊伴、與女人、比丘尼共期道行，是名阿練若非聚落。
When a monk lives outside a settlement, associates with thieves, and walks the path together with women and nuns, this is called living outside the settlement.



亦阿練若亦聚落者，
This is called a secluded place within an inhabited area.

拳打掌刀擬，
It is named after the fist strikes, palm slaps, and dagger thrusts.

是名亦阿練若亦聚落。
This is called a secluded place within an inhabited area.



有罪非阿練若非聚落者

Guilty are not those who are neither forest nor village dwellers.

王門側，是名非阿練若非聚落。

Near the king's gate, this is called non-forest and non-village.




有罪是時非非時者，
It is a sin to eat at improper times,

別眾食、
to eat separately from the assembly,

處處食、
to eat everywhere,

同器食、
to eat from the same vessel,

挑食八種美食、
to pick and choose from the eight kinds of food,

不作淨果食，
to eat without proper preparation,

是名時非非時。
this is referred to as improper timing.



有罪是非時非是時者，不白非時入聚落、非時食、日暮教誡比丘尼，是名非時非是時。
The guilty are those who act at improper times; entering a village at the wrong time without informing, eating at the wrong time, and instructing nuns in the evening; these are called improper times.




有罪亦是時亦非時者，拳打、掌刀擬，是名亦時亦非時。

For those guilty at both opportune times and inopportune times, the acts of punching and palm-striking are considered both timely and untimely.




有罪非時非非時者，

The guilty one's improper timing is neither incorrect nor correct timing.

正中時是名非時亦非非時。

In the exact proper time, it is called neither improper nor proper time.




有罪是夜非晝者

When there is guilt, it is night, not day.

若女人同室宿、未受具足人過三宿

If a woman shares the same room overnight, not yet receiving the full ordination for three nights,

日沒教誡比丘尼，是名夜非晝。

having instructed the bhikkhuni at sunset, it is called night, not day.




有罪是晝而非夜者，別眾食乃至不淨菓食，是名晝而非夜有罪。
There is guilt during the day and not at night, to partake separately from the group and consume impure fruit, which is named as guilt during the day and not at night.




亦是晝亦是夜者，拳打、掌刀擬，是名亦是晝亦是夜。
It is both day and night, with punches and chopping moves, this is called both day and night.




有罪亦非晝亦非夜者，明相出時，是名亦非晝亦非夜。
He who is guilty is neither of the day nor of the night; when the light appears, it is called neither day nor night.




有罪是覆處非露處者，女人同室宿
Guilt is being in a concealed rather than exposed place; staying overnight in the same room with a woman.

未受具足人過三夜
With someone who hasn't taken full ordination for more than three nights.

內敷置婬處坐、屏處坐
Sitting in a place covered with a mat or sitting in a screened place.

是名覆處非露處。
This is called a concealed rather than exposed place.




有罪是露處非覆處者，眾僧床褥露地自敷、若教人敷，不白去，離二十五肘，波夜提，是名露處非覆處。
The offense is when an open space is not covered; if a monk makes a bedding spread on the open ground by himself or instructs others to do so without announcing it, and it is twenty-five elbows away, it is called an exposed space, not a covered space. 




拳打、掌刀擬。
Punch, palm knife simulation.




屋檐下。

Under the eaves.




云何罪是行非住？

What is the sin of going and not staying?

比丘與女人、賊伴、比丘尼共期道行，

When a monk travels with women, bandits, or nuns,

僧和上、阿闍梨語「莫去」而去者，

who is told "do not go" by the senior monk or preceptor and still goes,

得罪，是名行非住。

he incurs a sin, which is called going and not staying.




云何罪是住非行？
What does it mean when a sin is "residing" and not "traveling"?

婬女邊住、沽酒邊住、摴蒱邊住、獄囚邊住、當門立住，
Living near prostitutes, living near taverns, living near gambling places, living near prisoners, standing at the door.

僧和上、阿闍梨語「莫住」而住，
The monk, senior monk, or instructor says "Do not stay," but one stays.

得罪，是名住非行。
This is considered a sin; it is called "residing" and not "traveling."




云何罪亦行亦住？

What is the offense that both proceeds and stays?

拳打、掌刀擬。

Punching and chopping with the hand.




云何罪非行非住？
How is the sin neither in walking nor in staying?

坐時眠時。
When sitting and when sleeping.




云何罪是立非坐？

What is the offense of standing and not sitting?

婬女邊立，

Standing near a prostitute,

乃至和上、阿闍梨語「莫立」而立者，

Even when the Upadhyaya or Acharya tells you "do not stand" and you still stand,

得罪。

you commit an offense.




云何罪是坐非立坐？

What offense is there in sitting rather than standing?

過量床、兜羅綿貯褥、皮坐具，及婬女邊坐、沽酒家、摴蒲邊、獄囚邊坐，

Sitting on oversized beds, cotton-padded cushions, leather cushions, or sitting beside a woman, in a liquor store, beside a gambling table, or beside a prisoner,

僧和上、阿闍梨語「莫坐」而坐者，得罪。

when a monk's superior or teacher says "do not sit" and one still sits, incurs an offense.




云何罪亦立亦坐？

What are the crimes of standing and sitting?

拳打、掌刀擬。

Punching and mimicking a palm knife.




云何罪非立非坐？

Why is the sin neither standing nor sitting?

若行、若眠時。

While walking or sleeping.



云何罪是坐非眠？  
What kind of offense is it to sit but not to sleep?  

坐過量床，乃至僧和上、阿闍梨語「莫坐」而坐者，得罪。  
Sitting on an oversized bed, or sitting when instructed by senior monks or teachers not to, constitutes an offense.  

云何罪是眠非坐？  
What kind of offense is it to sleep but not to sit?  

女人同室宿、未受具足人過三夜、過量床、兜羅貯褥、坐皮坐具。  
Sleeping in the same room as a woman, staying over three nights without full ordination, on an oversized bed, in a woolen blanket, or on animal skin seating.  




拳打、掌刀擬。

What are the actions considered both offenses and resting? A punch, a palm, a knife motion.




云何罪非坐非眠？

How is the offense neither sitting nor sleeping?

行時、立時。

When walking, when standing.




云何罪是眠非行？

What is the offense of sleeping but not acting?

女人同室宿乃至皮褥上眠。

A woman sleeps in the same room even on a leather mat.




云何罪是行非眠？
What is the offense of "acting not sleeping"?

比丘與女人、賊伴，
A monk with a woman, a thief companion,

乃至和上、阿闍梨語「莫去」而去者，
Even when the teacher or mentor says "Do not go" and he goes,

得罪。
commits an offense.




云何罪亦眠亦行？

How can sin both sleep and walk?

拳打、掌刀擬。

Punch and palm strike simulate.




云何罪非眠亦非行？

What sins are neither in sleep nor in motion?

坐、立時。

While sitting or standing.




罪是要在孤独中，而不是在人群中。

Sin is to be in solitude, not among the masses.

在孤独之中，三次劝诫不放弃。

In solitude, advised three times not to give up.




云何罪是眾多非屏處？

What sin is numerous and not in private?

眾多人中三諫不捨。

Among the multitude, three admonitions are not abandoned.




怎樣的罪過會在隱蔽處和眾人面前都出現呢？
What kind of offenses appear both in hidden places and in front of people?

拳頭打、用刀掌控。
Punching and brandishing knives.



在何种情况下，罪过不是在隐蔽处，也不是在人群中？在僧众之中。




罪属于何处？在于非僧众。

Where does guilt lie? It lies among those who are not monks.

无数次警示亦不弃放。

Even after countless warnings, they still do not relent.




什么过错不是在僧团中的？

What fault is not within the monastic community?

三次劝告后仍不放弃。

Not giving up after three admonitions.




云何罪亦眾多亦僧中？
What are the sins that are also numerous among the monks?

拳打、掌刀擬。
Punching and preparing to wield the palm knife.




云何罪非眾多非僧中？

How can a sin not be numerous nor among the monks?

屏處三諫不捨。

In a secluded place, three remonstrations are not abandoned.




僧中問閑靜。

In the assembly of monks, inquire into tranquility.

寡言是名屏處。

Speaking little is called a secluded place.

是處從福慧因是。

This place comes from the cause of blessings and wisdom.

僧中非屏處。

In the assembly of monks, it is not a secluded place.

僧中三諫不捨。

In the assembly of monks, three admonitions are not abandoned.




云何罪是屏處非僧中？

What is the offense that is a private admonition, not among the monks?

屏處三諫不捨。

A private admonition is given three times without yielding.




如何在僧中和隐蔽处犯罪？用拳头打，用手掌刀比划。

In what ways do offenses occur both among monks and in secluded places? Using fists to punch and hands to gesture like a knife.




云何罪非僧中非屏處？
What is the offense that is neither among the monks nor in a secluded place?

眾多人中三諫不捨。
In the midst of many people, three admonishments are not relinquished.




云何罪是冬非春？

How is the offense applicable in winter but not in spring?

比丘到八月十五日不捨雨浴衣，

If a monk does not give up the rain bath robe by the fifteenth day of the eighth month,

至十六日捨，

but waits until the sixteenth day to give it up,

得越毘尼罪。

he commits an offense of transgressing the Vinaya.




云何罪是春非冬？

How is a sin in the spring and not in the winter?

比丘受迦絺那衣，至臘月十五日應捨，

When a monk receives the robe for the rainy season, it should be relinquished by the 15th day of the last month.

若不捨，至十六日者越毘尼罪。

If not relinquished by the 16th day, it constitutes a transgression of the Vinaya.



云何罪亦冬亦春！

How is the crime both winter and spring!

拳打、掌刀擬。

Punching and slashing with a palm knife.




何谓非冬非春的罪？在安居的时候。

What is the sin that is neither in winter nor in spring? During the time of retreat.




云何罪是春非夏？
How is the offense related to spring and not summer?

比丘受迦絺那衣不捨，
A monk receives and does not relinquish the Kāṣāya robe,

至臘月十六日越毘尼罪。
until the sixteenth day of the twelfth month, which is an offense in the Vinaya.



云何罪是夏非春？
What offense applies to summer and not to spring?

比丘至四月十六日應安居，
A monk should settle down by the 16th of the fourth month,

不安居者，越毘尼罪。
if he does not settle, he commits a Vinaya offense.

到後安居復不安居者，
If he fails to settle even afterward,

得二越毘尼罪。
he commits two Vinaya offenses.




为何犯罪既是春天又是夏天？

Why is the crime both spring and summer?

拳打、掌刀拟。

Fists punch, hands simulate a knife.




云何罪非春非夏？是冬時。
How is the crime neither in spring nor in summer? It is in winter.




云何罪是夏非冬者？
What is the offense that applies to summer but not winter?

於二安居時而不安居，
During the two periods of retreat, not staying properly,

得二越毘尼罪。
incurs the offense of two Vinaya breaches.




云何罪是冬非夏？

Why is the offense relevant to winter and not summer?

八月十五日應捨雨浴衣而不捨，至十六日得罪。

On August 15th, one should have laid aside the rain bathing clothes but did not, and thus by the 16th incurred an offense.




云何罪亦是夏亦是冬？

What crime is both summer and winter?

拳打、掌刀擬。

Punches and palms resemble knives.




云何罪非夏非冬？
What is the crime neither in summer nor winter?

是春時，
It is springtime,

是名罪非夏非冬。
This is called the crime neither in summer nor winter.




復有罪名

Furthermore, there is a charge

不攝身

of not restraining the body,

不攝口

not restraining the speech,

不攝身口

and not restraining both body and speech.

身犯

There is transgression by the body,

口犯

transgression by the speech,

身口犯

and transgression by both body and speech.

身惡行

There is evil conduct of the body,

口惡行

evil conduct of the speech,

身口惡行

and evil conduct of both body and speech.

是名罪

This is called a sin.



無罪者，攝身、攝口、攝身口，身不犯、口不犯、身口不犯，身不惡行、口不惡行、身口不惡行，是名無罪。
The innocent are those who control their body and speech, committing no bodily or verbal offenses, thus leading a life free of evil actions through body and speech. This is called being innocent.




佛告諸比丘：「持律比丘與他出罪時，有罪亦知、無罪亦知。

The Buddha told the monks: "When a monk who upholds the rules helps others absolve their sins, they know when there is a sin and when there is not.

覆亦知。不覆亦知。」

They also know when to cover up and when not to cover up."

覆亦知者，比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，不作覆藏心；至日出時作覆藏心，至明相出時，是名一夜覆。

Knowing when to cover up means that when a monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense at dawn, knowing it is a sin, they do not intend to hide it; but by the time of sunrise they intend to hide it until the next dawn, this is called a one-night cover-up.

復有覆名，比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，不作覆藏心；至食時作覆藏心，至明相出時，是名一夜覆。

Another type of cover-up is when a monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense at dawn, knowing it is a sin, they do not intend to hide it; but by meal time they intend to hide it until the next dawn, this is called a one-night cover-up.

如是中時、晡時、日沒、初夜、中夜時亦如是。

Similarly, this applies during midday, afternoon, sunset, early night, and midnight.




比丘至明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，不作覆藏心；
When a monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense in the morning, recognizes it as a fault, but does not have the intention to conceal it;

乃至後夜知是罪，作覆藏心，至明相出時，
Later at night, recognizes it as a fault and intends to conceal it until the morning;

是名二時一夜覆。
This is called "concealing for two periods in one night."



復有覆名

There is also the name of concealment.

比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙

Monks commit the offense of Sangha-bāṣīṣa when the light first appears.

不知是罪，至日出時知是罪，不作覆藏心

Not knowing it is a sin, they realize it is by sunrise but do not have the intention to conceal it.

到食時作覆藏心，乃至明相出時，是名一夜覆

They intend to conceal it by meal time until the light appears again, which is called one-night concealment.

中時、晡時、日沒、初夜時亦如是

Midday, afternoon, sunset, and early night are also the same.



比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙  
When a monk commits a Sanghabheda offense at dawn  

不知是罪，乃至中夜知是罪，不作覆藏心；  
without knowing it is an offense, he realizes it is an offense by midnight and does not intend to conceal it;  

至後夜作覆藏心，至明相出時，  
he forms the intention to conceal it by the later part of the night, until dawn comes,  

是名三時一夜覆。  
this is called a one-night concealment in three periods.  




復有覆名，比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，不知是罪，到食時知是罪，不作覆藏心；

Again, there is the term "covering name," where a monk commits a serious offense at dawn, not realizing it is a crime until meal time and does not harbor a concealing heart;

至日中作覆藏心，至明相出時，是名一夜覆晡時。

By noon he harbors a concealing heart, until the next dawn; this is called "covering until morning."

日沒、初夜亦如是。

The same applies after sunset and during the early night.



比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，不知是罪，
When a monk commits an offense of Sanghabasisa at the time of dawn without knowing it is an offense,

乃至中夜知是罪，
and knows it is an offense by midnight,

不作覆藏心，
without concealing it in his mind,

到後夜作覆藏心，
but keeps it concealed until the end of the night,

至明相出時，
up to dawn,

是名四時一夜覆。
this is called covering for four periods in a single night.



復有覆名，比丘明相出時，犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，覆不覆猶豫；
There is also another term for concealment. When a monk commits an offense of Saṅghādisesa at the time of dawn, and knows it is an offense, yet hesitates whether to conceal it or not;

至日出時作覆藏心，乃至明相出時，是名一夜覆。
At sunrise, he makes up his mind to conceal it until the next dawn, this is called concealing for one night.

如是食時、中時、晡時、日沒時、初夜、中夜乃至後夜作覆藏心，至明相出，
Similarly, if he makes up his mind to conceal it during meal time, midday, afternoon, sunset, early night, midnight, or late night, and continues until dawn,

是名二時一夜覆。
this is called concealing for two periods and one night.




復有覆名，比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，不知是罪，至日出時知是罪，覆不覆猶豫；
Then there is the act of concealment, when a monk commits an offense at the break of dawn without knowing it's a transgression, and only realizes it's a transgression at sunrise, hesitating whether to conceal or not;

到食時作覆藏心，至明相出時，是名一夜覆。
At mealtime, he forms the intention to conceal it, continuing until dawn; this is called concealment for one night.

如是中時、晡時、日沒、初夜亦如是。
The same applies to midday, afternoon, sunset, and early night.



比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，不知是罪，

When the monk commits a Saṅghādisesa offense at dawn, he does not know it is a sin,

乃至中夜知是罪，覆不覆猶豫；

Until midnight, he realizes it is a sin and hesitates whether to hide it or not;

到後夜作覆藏心，至明相出時，

In the later night, he decides to conceal it, until dawn comes,

是名三時一夜覆。

This is called concealing for a whole night in three phases.



復有覆名，比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，不知是罪，乃至食時知是罪，覆不覆猶豫；

Again, there is the hidden label: When a monk commits a Sanghādisesa offense at the time of dawn’s appearance, he does not know it is a transgression; even up to the time of eating, he hesitates on covering up or not.

到中時作覆藏心，至明相出時，是名一夜覆。

At midday, he forms the intent to conceal it, until dawn emerges; this is called "one night's concealment."

如是晡時、日沒、初夜亦如是。

And it is the same for afternoon, sunset, and early night.




比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙
The monk committed a Sanghabhedaka offense at dawn

不知是罪
without knowing it was an offense,

乃至中夜知是罪
Until midnight, he realized it was an offense,

覆不覆猶豫
hesitant about whether to confess or not.



到後夜作覆藏心，
Entering the later night with a hidden heart,

至明相出時，
Until the time when it emerges at dawn,

是名四時一夜覆。
This is called the covering of four periods in one night.




復有覆名

There is again a name for concealment.

比丘明相出時犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心；

When a monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense at dawn, knowing it is a sin, and has a mind of concealment;

至日出時作不覆藏心，

By sunrise, he has a mind not to conceal;

乃至後夜作覆藏心，

Until the latter part of the night, he has a mind to conceal;

至明相出時，是名一夜覆。

Until dawn, this is called a one-night concealment.




復有覆名，比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，若隔壁、若隔塹、若闇中小聲說他名，

Again there is the concealed name, when a monk violates the Sanghadisesa, if behind a wall, over a ditch, or in the dark whispering his name,

某甲比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，是不名發露，

A certain monk violates the Sanghadisesa, this is not called revelation,

知而妄語，得波夜提，是名覆。

Knowing and lying, incurs a Pācittiya, this is called concealment.




復有不覆名，若隔障、若隔塹、若闇中小聲自稱說他名犯僧伽婆尸沙，得名發露。
Again, if without covering one's name, if one speaks it softly in the dark, or as if behind a barrier or trench, claiming it is one's name and committing the Sanghavasesa offense, the name is exposed.

但諂曲作，得越毘尼罪。
But if done deceitfully, one commits a Vinaya transgression.




復有不覆名，比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，不隔壁、不隔塹、不闇中，不小聲，不說他自說名字犯，是名不覆。
Again, there is unhidden recognition; if a monk violates the Sangghavasesha offense, it is not hidden by means of a wall, a ditch, or the darkness. It is not in a quiet voice, nor does he say his own name as the one who committed the offense; this is called unhidden.




復有不覆名

There is also the name of not being hidden

非罪想罪疑、覆不覆疑、夜疑

Non-crime thinking of crime, doubt of being hidden or not hidden, and night doubt

若發露，是名不覆。

If revealed, it is called not being hidden.




復有不覆

Moreover, there are those who do not conceal,

不作覆藏心

They do not harbor a hidden mind,

未得發露

Before attaining revelation,

若忘

If they forget,

若罷道

If they abandon the path,

若入定

If they enter meditation,

若命終

If they face the end of life,

是名不覆

This is called not concealing.



佛告諸比丘：「持律比丘與他出罪時，有罪應知、無罪應知、覆應知、不覆應知、發露應知、不發露應知。

The Buddha told the monks: "When a monk who observes the precepts exonerates another, he should know whether there is a crime or not, whether it should be covered or not, and whether it should be revealed or not.

或有覆非發露、或有發露非覆、或有覆亦發露、或有非覆非發露。」

Sometimes it is covered but not revealed, sometimes revealed but not covered, sometimes both covered and revealed, or neither covered nor revealed."




云何覆非發露？

What is concealment and non-revelation?

比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，

A monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense,

知是罪，

knows it is a transgression,

作覆藏心，

conceals it with the intention to hide,

不向他說，

does not confess it to others,

是名覆非發露。

this is called concealment and non-revelation.




云何是發露非覆藏？
What is disclosure, not concealment?

比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense,

知是罪，不作覆藏心，
knowing it is an offense, does not intend to conceal it,

向他說，
and tells it to another,

是名發露非覆。
this is called disclosure, not concealment.



云何是覆亦發露？
What is concealment and also confession?

比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk commits a Saṅghādisesa offense,

知是罪，覆藏已後向他說，
knows it is a sin, conceals it, and later tells another,

是名覆亦發露。
this is called concealment and also confession.




云何非覆非發露？
How is it neither hiding nor revealing?

比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk violates the Sanghadisesa,

知是罪，
having known it to be a transgression,

不作覆藏心，
does not intend to conceal,

作是念：「待時待方待人，
thinking thus: "Waiting for the right time, place, and person,

當如法作。」
should act according to the Dharma."

是名非覆非發露。
This is called neither hiding nor revealing.




佛告諸比丘：「持律比丘與他出罪時，有罪應知、無罪應知、覆應知、不覆應知、發露應知、不發露應知、與別住應知、不與別住應知。」

The Buddha told the monks: "When the monk observing the precepts absolves others of offenses, they should know if there is an offense, if there is no offense, if it is covered, if it is not covered, if it is confessed, if it is unconfessed, if they should live apart, and if they should not live apart."

者，云何不應與？

So, how should it not be given?

無罪不應與、不覆不應與，罪不決定、覆不決定、夜不決定，前人不索不問，不應與。

It should not be given for a non-offense, not given if not covered, if the offense is not determined, if the cover is not determined, if the night is not determined, and not given if the former person does not inquire or ask.



云何應與？
How should it be given?

有罪應與、覆應與，
It should be given if there is wrongdoing, and it should be concealed,

罪決定、覆決定、
Wrongdoing is determined, concealment is determined,

夜決定、前人索問，
Night determination, questioning by predecessors,

應與。
It should be given.




如法與不如法與。
Legal or not legal.

云何不如法與？
What is not legal?

無罪、罪不決定、覆不決定、夜不決定、前人不索不問、眾不成就、白不成就、羯磨不成就，
No guilt, undefined guilt, undefined coverage, undefined night, previous people do not demand or ask, the group is not successful, the announcement is not fulfilled, the ritual is not complete.

是名不如法與。
This is called not legal.




云何如法與？

How is it in accordance with the law to give?

有罪、罪決定、覆決定、夜決定、前人索問、眾成就、白成就、羯磨成就，

Having committed offenses, determined offenses, covered offenses, nighttime determinations, asked by predecessors, group fulfillment, pure fulfillment, karma fulfillment,

若一一成就，是名如法與。

If each is fulfilled, it is called being lawfully given.




不如法行婆利婆沙、如法行婆利婆沙。

Illegal and legal conduct in the community.

云何不如法行？

What is considered illegal conduct?

僧伽藍無比丘，中間有罪更舉，

In the monastery without monks, a crime arises in the midst.

與比丘同房同障住，客比丘來不白，

Living with monks in the same lodging without informing guest monks.

時集、非時集不白，

Not informing gatherings at the appropriate or inappropriate times.

是名不如法行。

This is known as illegal conduct.




云何如法行？

How does one practice according to the Dharma?

僧伽藍有比丘住，

There is a monk living in a monastery,

行婆利婆沙中間不犯不舉，

who behaves properly between the Vinaya and the disciplinary rules without committing any offenses.

與比丘別房別障住，

He resides in a separate room with partitions from other monks,

客比丘來白，

When visiting monks come and report,

時集、非時集白，

He organizes assemblies at the appropriate and inappropriate times.

是名如法行。

This is called practicing according to the Dharma.




夜斷、夜不斷。
Night is interrupted, night is uninterrupted.

云何夜不斷？
How is the night uninterrupted?

僧伽藍中有比丘住，
In the monastery, there is a monk residing,

乃至時集、非時集白，
who gathers at the proper and improper times,

是名夜不斷。
this is called night uninterrupted.




云何夜斷？
How does one discontinue at night?

僧伽藍中無比丘住，
There are no monks residing in the monastery,

乃至時集、
until the gathering on time,

非時集不白，
and the improper gathering does not occur,

是名夜斷。
this is called discontinuance at night.




中間有罪、中間無罪。
In the middle, there is guilt; in the middle, there is no guilt.

云何中間有罪？
What is the guilt in the middle?

發露已，僧未與波利婆沙，更犯；
Having confessed, yet before the monks have granted probation, commits again;

行波利婆沙中間犯，是名中間罪。
While undergoing probation, commits an offense in the middle; this is called middle guilt.




何中間無罪？

What is the middle without guilt?

中間不犯，是名無罪。

The middle does not commit, this is called without guilt.




行波利婆沙比丘，應隨順行七事。  
The monk Xingbo Lipo Sha should follow the seven practices.

何等七？  
What are the seven?

一、比丘事；  
1. Monks' affairs;

二、比丘尼事；  
2. Nuns' affairs;

三、眷屬事；  
3. Matters regarding relatives;

四、入聚落事；  
4. Entering the village affairs;

五、執眾苦事；  
5. Handling collective hardships;

六、受拜事；  
6. Receiving respects;

七、王事。  
7. Affairs of the king.




云何比丘事？
What is the duty of a monk?

不得受比丘禮、不得說比丘罪、不得與比丘語論，
One must not receive the respects of a monk, not speak of a monk's faults, and not discuss with monks.

不得說沙彌罪、不得福罰沙彌、不得與沙彌語論，
One must not speak of a novice monk's faults, not reward or punish novice monks, and not discuss with novice monks.

不得作比丘使、不得在比丘前後行入聚落、
One must not be a servant of monks, not enter a village before or after monks,

眾集時不得為眾作說法人除別處，
When gathering, one must not act as a speaker for the assembly unless in a different place,

是名比丘事。
this is called the duty of a monk.




云何比丘尼事？

What are the matters concerning a Bhikkhuni?

不得受比丘尼禮、不得說比丘尼罪、不得與比丘尼語論，

A Bhikkhu may not accept homage from a Bhikkhuni, may not disclose the faults of a Bhikkhuni, nor engage in discussions with a Bhikkhuni.

不得說式叉摩尼罪、沙彌尼罪，

He may not disclose the faults of a Sikkhamana or a Samaneri.

不得福罰式叉摩尼、沙彌尼，

He may not bless or punish a Sikkhamana or a Samaneri.

不得與式叉摩尼、沙彌尼語論，

He may not engage in discussions with a Sikkhamana or a Samaneri.

不得遮比丘尼布薩自恣、不得遮比丘尼齊門止、

He may not prevent a Bhikkhuni from attending confession or restrict her access to the rest quarters.

不得往教誡比丘尼、若已受者不得往，

He may not go to instruct a Bhikkhuni, and if already ordained, he may not return.

是名比丘尼事。

These are known as matters concerning a Bhikkhuni.



云何眷屬事？
What is the matter of associates?

不得度人、不得與人受具足、不得受人依止及畜沙彌、不得受比丘供給、不得授人經、
One should not ordain others, not receive complete vows from others, not let others rely on oneself and have novice monks, not accept offerings from monks, nor teach the scriptures to others,

不得從他受經、本所誦經當細聲誦，
nor receive scriptures from others, and should chant the scriptures in a low voice,

若先有依止弟子、教令依止他，
If there are disciples who previously relied on oneself, teach them to rely on others,

當斷眷屬，是名眷屬事。
one must sever associations; this is called the matter of associates.




云何入聚落事？
How does one enter a village?

不得太早入聚落太晚出、不得在前後行，
One should not enter a village too early or leave too late, nor should they walk at the front or back.

沙門入聚落不得到知識檀越家、不得無比丘僧伽藍中住、
When entering a village, a monk should not visit a layperson's house they know, nor should they stay where there are no monks.

坐時食時在比丘下。
During sitting and eating times, they should be below the monks.

不得使人迎食、不得與人迎食，
One should not have someone receive food nor receive food from someone.

除次到，是名入聚落事。
Except in order of arrival, this is called the matter of entering a village.




云何執眾苦事？
How to undertake all the arduous tasks?

晨起掃塔院僧院、
Sweep the pagoda courtyard and the monastery in the morning,

授僧水、
Provide water to the monks,

洗僧大小行處、
Clean the monks' facilities,

如是一切可作事應隨力作、
Do all such tasks according to one's ability,

不得與欲、
Without following desires,

不得受他欲，
Without accepting others' desires,

除次到，
Unless it is turn-based, 

是名執眾苦事。
This is called undertaking all the arduous tasks.



云何受拜事？
What is the matter of receiving obeisance?

不得受一切拜，
Cannot receive any obeisance,

白一羯磨、白三羯磨盡不得受，
The motions requiring one proclamation or three proclamations cannot be received,

是名受拜事。
This is called the matter of receiving obeisance.




云何王事？

What is royal service?

不得恃王大臣居士凶人力勢、

Do not rely on the might and power of wicked ministers and laypeople,

不得嫌佛嫌法嫌僧嫌羯磨人，

Do not disdain the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, or those who perform religious duties,

但自責不得嫌他，

Only blame yourself and do not blame others,

是名王事。

This is called royal service.




波利婆沙比丘行此七事，是名隨順行。
When Bhikshu Polivasa practices these seven actions, it is called following accordant actions.

不行者是名不隨順行。
Those who do not practice are called non-accordant actions.




不應與摩那埵、應與摩那埵。
Should not give to those in probation, should give to those in probation.

云何不應與？
How should one not give?

無罪不應與，覆藏、未與別住不應與，
Should not give where there is no offense, concealment, or when not living separately.

半覆半不覆不應與，
Should not give when half concealed and half unconcealed.

罪不決定、覆不決定、夜不決定不應與，
Should not give when the offense is undecided, concealment is undecided, or the night is undecided.

波利婆沙不決定不應與，
Should not give when the confession is undecided.

不索不問不應與。
Should not give when not requested or inquired.

云何應與？
How should one give?

有罪、覆、行波利婆沙竟、
When there is offense, concealment, or confession has been completed,

罪決定、覆決定、夜決定、
When the offense is decided, concealment is decided, night is decided,

波利婆沙決定、
When the confession is decided,

前人索問應與。
One should give when requested or inquired by the person in front.




不如法與、如法與。

Illegal actions and legal actions.

云何不如法與？

What is an illegal action?

無罪，乃至不索不問、眾不成就、白不成就、羯磨不成就，

No offense, yet things like not being asked, the assembly not being completed, the announcement not completed, the formal act not completed,

若一一不成就，是名不如法與。

If any one is not fulfilled, it is called an illegal action.




如何才能如法给与？如果有罪，到询问僧众成就、白成就、羯磨一一成就，这被称为如法给与。

How can it be given lawfully? If there is a transgression, then inquiring about the achievement in the congregation, the achievement in declaration, and the achievement in karmic actions, one by one, this is termed lawful giving.




不究竟行摩那埵、究竟行摩那埵。
The uncompleted practice of Mānata, the completed practice of Mānata.

云何不究竟行摩那埵？
What is the uncompleted practice of Mānata?

眾不滿不名行摩那埵、中間犯更舉、與比丘一房一障住、不白客比丘、時集非時集不白、不日日白界內僧，
If the assembly is not full, it is not called the practice of Mānata. If there's an offense in the middle and not confessed again, if living with a fellow monk in the same hut without informing, if there's an assembly at a proper or improper time without informing, if one doesn't daily inform the monks within the boundary,

是名不究竟行。
this is called the uncompleted practice.



云何究竟行？
What is considered complete conduct?

眾滿是名究竟。
A full assembly is called completion.

中間不犯不舉、
In the meantime, do not offend or initiate,

不共比丘一房一障住、
Do not share a room or barrier with a monk,

客比丘來白、
When guest monks arrive, inform them,

時集非時集白、
Gather at appropriate times and inappropriate times to inform,

日日白界內僧，
Inform the monks within the boundary daily,

是名究竟行。
This is called complete conduct.




夜斷，夜不斷。

Night is broken, yet the night is unbroken.

云何夜斷？

How is the night broken?

夜中間眾不滿，

If, during the night, the assembly is not satisfied,

乃至不日日白界內僧，

or if there is no daily announcement within the monastic community,

是名夜斷。

it is called the night broken.




云何夜不斷？

What is meant by the night being unbroken?

中間眾滿，乃至日日白界內僧，

In between, assembly is full, even up to monks in the white realm every day.

是名夜不斷。

This is called the unbroken night.




中间有罪、中间无罪。

Guilty in the middle, not guilty in the middle.

云何中间有罪？

What is meant by being guilty in the middle?

未与摩那埵中间犯、与摩那埵中间犯、究竟中间犯，是名中间罪。

Not having committed an offense with Monado in the middle, having committed an offense with Monado in the middle, having ultimately committed an offense in the middle, this is called being guilty in the middle.



云何中間無罪？
How is there no fault in the middle?

無上諸事，是名中間無罪。
All supreme matters, this is called faultless in the middle.




行摩那埵比丘，應隨順行七事，

The bhikshu in the probationary period should follow seven practices,

如上說，

as previously mentioned,

是名摩那埵比丘隨順行；

this is called the bhikshu's compliance during probation;

不行者，

if not practiced,

是名不隨順。

it is called non-compliance.



應與阿浮呵那、不應與。
One should not associate with A. Puha Na.

不應與者，無罪不應與，覆、未與別住不應與，
It is not right to associate: no offense without covering, one should not associate without covering.

摩那埵不究竟不應與，不覆、未行摩那埵不應與，
One should not engage with incomplete Ma Na Duo, without covering and not practicing Ma Na Duo, one should not engage.

覆不覆不應與，罪不決定、覆不決定、夜不決定、
Without covering, one should not engage; sin is uncertain, cover is uncertain, night is uncertain.

別住不決定、摩那埵不決定、不索不問，
Separate residence is uncertain, Ma Na Duo is uncertain, without seeking or asking.

是名不應與阿浮呵那。
This is called not associating with A. Puha Na.



應與者，有罪應與、覆罪應與、別住摩那埵究竟應與、不覆摩那埵究竟應與，罪決定、覆決定、夜決定、別住決定、摩那埵決定、前人索問，是名應與阿浮呵那。
One should grant to those who should be granted; grant to those who have committed offenses; after considering whether the offenses are covered or uncovered, whether one should reside separately or ultimately engage with Manatuo; determining offenses, covering decisions, nighttime decisions, separate decisions, Manatuo decisions, when previous people inquire, this is called Apaṇḍha-nā.




如法與阿浮呵那、不如法與阿浮呵那。

According to Dharma, there are rightful and unrightful offerings.

不如法與者，無罪不應與，

Unrightful offerings should not be made if there is no fault.

乃至眾不成就、白不成就、羯磨不成就，

Even when an assembly is not complete, a declaration is not complete, or a ceremony is not complete,

若一一不成就，是名不如法與。

If each individual aspect is not complete, it is called an unrightful offering.




如法與者，有罪應與，乃至眾成就、白成就、羯磨成就，若一一成就，是名如法與。
For giving according to the law, if there is a fault, it should be given, even up to the achievement of the assembly, the achievement of the announcement, the achievement of the karma, if each is achieved, it is called giving according to the law.




阿浮呵那共覆者，比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，不作覆藏心，
The co-concealment in Avuḍaha occurs when a monk commits a Saṅghādisesa offense on the first day of the month, knows it is a fault, but does not have a mental intent to conceal it.

如是二日、三日乃至十日，
On the second day, the third day, and so on, up to the tenth day,

一切知是罪，作覆藏心，
knowing they are all offenses, he forms the intent to conceal them.

至明相出時，是十罪一切共一夜覆，
Until dawn, these ten offenses are all concealed together for one night.

應作十別住羯磨、十摩那埵、十阿浮呵那，
He should perform ten separate acts of probation, ten Manattas, and ten Avuḍaha rituals.

亦得作一別住羯磨、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，
It is also permissible to perform one act of probation, one Manatta, and one Avuḍaha.

是名共覆。
This is called co-concealment.




復有共覆名，比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，

There is also the name "joint concealment," when a monk, on the first day of the month, commits one Saṅghādisesa offense,

知是罪，不作覆藏心，

knows it is a transgression, but does not intend to conceal it,

如是二日犯二、三日犯三，

thus on the second day commits two, on the third day commits three,

乃至十日犯十僧伽婆尸沙，

until the tenth day when he commits ten Saṅghādisesa offenses,

一切知是罪，

in all of which he knows are transgressions,

一切作覆藏心，

and intends to conceal all of them,

至明相出時，

until daylight appears,

是五十五僧伽婆尸沙罪，

is fifty-five Saṅghādisesa offenses,

一切共一夜覆，

all concealed in one night,

應作五十五別住羯磨、五十五摩那埵、五十五阿浮呵那，

he should perform fifty-five separate acts of suspension, fifty-five confessions, fifty-five procedures of rehabilitation,

亦得作一別住羯磨、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，

or he may perform one act of suspension, one confession, one procedure of rehabilitation,

是名共覆。

this is called joint concealment.




復有共覆名，
There is also a term for shared concealment,

比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk commits an offense of a Samghavasesa on the first day of the month,

不知是罪，
Not knowing it is an offense,

如是二日、三日乃至十日，
Thus on the second, third, up to the tenth day,

一切知是罪、
All understand it is an offense,

一切作覆藏心，
All conceal this fact with intent,

至明相出時，
Until dawn appears,

是十罪共一夜覆，
These ten offenses are concealed for one night altogether,

乃至亦得作一別住羯磨、
Until it may be resolved through a separate settlement,

一摩那埵、
A Manatta,

一阿浮呵那，
An Apattikarana,

是名共覆。
This is called shared concealment.




復有共覆名，
Again, there is something called "joint concealment,"

比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk violates a Sanghabhāshi on the first day of the month,

不知是罪，
without knowing it is a sin,

不作覆藏心，
without the intention of concealing it,

乃至十日犯十僧伽婆尸沙，
up to the tenth day, he violates ten Sanghabhāshi,

一切知是罪，
knowing all along it is a sin,

作覆藏心，
with the intention of concealing it,

至明相出時，
until the break of dawn,

是五十五罪共一夜覆，
this results in fifty-five sins being jointly concealed in one night,

乃至亦得作一別住羯磨、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，
even so, one can perform one separation act, one Manattā, one Abbhāna,

是名共覆。
this is called "joint concealment."



參差覆者，比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心，至二日向他說已，復犯僧伽婆尸沙，乃至十日向他說已，復犯，知是罪，作覆藏心，至十一日向他說，是十僧伽婆尸沙，如是一切各一夜共參差覆，應作十別住羯磨、十摩那埵、十阿浮呵那，亦得作一別住、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，是名參差覆。

A monk who commits a Sanghavasesa offense on the first day of the month, knowing it is a sin, conceals it, tells it to someone on the second day, commits the offense again, and continues this until the tenth day, each time telling someone, knows it is a sin and conceals it until the eleventh day when he tells someone. This results in ten Sanghavasesa offenses. Each night, throughout this process, it should be handled with ten different disciplinary actions of Kamma, Mannatta, and Avuha, or also with one action of each. This is called "intermittent concealment."




復有參差覆名，比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心，至二日向人說已，復更犯，

There is also a name called intermittent covering. A monk commits a Sanghabashisha offense on the first day of the month, knows it is a sin, conceals it, and confesses to someone on the second day, only to commit again.

如是乃至十日犯十僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心，至十一日向人說，

Thus, until the tenth day, having committed ten Sanghabashisha offenses, he knows it is a sin, conceals it, and confesses on the eleventh day.

是五十五僧伽婆尸沙，如是一切各一夜參差覆，

This results in fifty-five Sanghabashisha offenses, each concealed one night intermittently.

應作五十五別住羯磨、五十五摩那埵、五十五阿浮呵那，

He should perform fifty-five separate residence procedures, fifty-five Manatta practices, fifty-five Avijka ceremonies.

亦得作一別住羯磨、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，

Or, he may perform one separate residence procedure, one Manatta practice, one Avijka ceremony.

是名參差覆。

This is called intermittent covering.




無量覆者，或憶罪不憶夜、或憶夜不憶罪、或憶罪亦憶夜、或不憶罪亦不憶夜。
Some people remember sins but not nights, or remember nights but not sins, or remember both sins and nights, or neither.

憶罪不憶夜者，憶知犯罪多少、不憶若干夜。
Those who remember sins but not nights are aware of the number of offenses but not how many nights.

憶夜不憶罪者，憶知爾許夜、不憶罪多少。
Those who remember nights but not sins are aware of the number of nights but not the number of offenses.

亦憶罪亦憶夜者，憶知罪多少、憶知若干夜。
Those who remember both sins and nights are aware of the number of offenses and the number of nights.

不憶罪不憶夜者，不憶犯罪多少、亦不憶若干夜。
Those who remember neither sins nor nights are unaware of the number of offenses and the number of nights.




是中憶罪不憶夜者，應當問：「汝何時犯？未有歲時耶？」

Among those who remember the offense but not the night, one should ask, "When did you commit it? Was it not within the year?"

若前人默然者，應隨年與別住。

If the person remains silent, they should be separated according to the year.

若言：「不爾。」更問：「一歲耶？二歲耶？五歲耶？」

If they say, "No," ask further, "One year? Two years? Five years?"

可隨默然處與別住，是名憶罪不憶夜。

They can be separated according to where silence occurs; this is called remembering the offense but not the night.




憶夜不憶罪者，
One who remembers the night but not the sins,

隨夜多少，
In accordance with the number of nights,

應與作無量罪別住，
Should be treated as having countless sins separately,

是名憶夜不憶罪。
This is called remembering the night but not the sins.




憶罪亦憶夜者
Those who remember their sins also remember the night

憶罪多少隨所憶夜與別住
The extent to which they remember their sins varies with the night they recall and their different residences

是名憶罪亦憶夜
This is called remembering both the sins and the night




不忆罪不忆夜者，应当问：「无岁时犯耶？」
Someone who does not remember their offenses or the nights on which they were committed should be asked: "Were they committed during years without seasons?"

若默然者，随年与作无量罪别住。
If they remain silent, they shall be assigned an indefinite separate residence according to the years.

若言：「不尔。」更问：「未有岁耶？一岁、二、三、四、五岁耶？」
If they say, "Not so," further ask, "Was it less than a year? Was it one year, two, three, four, or five years?"

随默然处与作无量罪别住，是名无量覆。
Depending on where they remain silent, they are given an indefinite separate residence, which is called an indefinite covering.




共覆、參差覆、無量覆，是三俱名為覆。
General covering, uneven covering, and infinite covering—these three are collectively known as coverings.




丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心，不向他說；
For one who conceals separately, a monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense on the first day of the month, knows it is an offense, and with a concealing mind does not confess to others;

二日復犯，知是罪，作覆藏心，不向他說；
On the second day, he commits the offense again, knows it is an offense, and with a concealing mind does not confess to others;

乃至十日復犯，知是罪，作覆藏心，不向他說，
Up to the tenth day, he commits the offense again, knows it is an offense, and with a concealing mind does not confess to others,

是十罪各別覆，最後罪一夜覆，
These ten offenses are concealed separately, and the last offense is concealed for one night.

如是二夜三夜，乃至初罪有十夜覆，
Thus for two nights, three nights, up to the first offense being concealed for ten nights,

應與作十別住羯磨、十摩那埵、十阿浮呵那，
He should undergo the ten separate dwelling karmas, ten Manatta, and ten penances.

亦得作一別住、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那。
Or he may do one separate dwelling, one Manatta, and one penance.



復有別覆名，比丘月一日犯一僧伽婆尸沙，

Additionally, there is a separate concealment name; a monk commits one Sanghāvasesa on the first day of the month,

知是罪，作覆藏心，不向他人說，

knows it is a sin, conceals it in his heart, and does not tell others,

乃至十日犯十僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，作覆藏心，不向他說，

even up to committing ten Sanghāvasesa in ten days, knowing it is a sin, concealing it in his heart, and not telling others,

是五十五罪各別覆，最後罪一夜覆，

there are fifty-five sins each separately concealed, with the final sin concealed for one night,

如是二夜三夜，乃至初罪有五十五夜覆，

like this for two nights, three nights, and so on, until the first sin is concealed for fifty-five nights,

應與五十五夜別住羯磨、五十五摩那埵、五十五阿浮呵那，

it should be dealt with by fifty-five nights of separate residence karma, fifty-five Mānatta, fifty-five Avakārana,

亦得作一別住、一摩那埵、一阿浮呵那，

or it can be handled with one separate residence, one Mānatta, one Avakārana,

是名別覆。

this is called separate concealment.

同覆別覆，是二俱名覆。

Together concealment and separate concealment, these two are both called concealment.




比舍遮脚者，或有罪長非夜長、或有夜長非罪長、或有罪長夜亦長、或有非罪長非夜長。

Some who cover their feet may have long guilt but not long night, or long night but not long guilt, or both long guilt and long night, or neither long guilt nor long night.




罪长非夜长者，  
A crime that is prolonged but not a night-long duration,

比丘竟日犯僧伽婆尸沙，  
A monk violates the Sanghādisesa precept all day long,

知是罪，向人说，  
He knows it is a crime and tells others,

是名罪长非夜长。  
This is called a crime that is prolonged but not a night-long duration.




有夜長非罪長者，
When the night is long but the sin is not long,

比丘犯一僧伽婆尸沙，
A monk commits a Sanghadisesa offense,

知是罪，
Knowing it is a sin,

作覆藏心，
With the intention to conceal it,

不向他人說，
Not telling others about it,

是名夜長非罪長。
This is called the night being long but the sin not being long.




有罪長夜亦長者，比丘日日犯僧伽婆尸沙，知是罪，覆半說半，是名罪長夜亦長。
A person with guilt that leads to a long night is like a monk who commits the Sanghavasesha offense daily; knowing it's a sin, they hide half and confess half, which is called having guilt with a long night.




有非罪長亦非夜長者，比丘犯僧伽婆尸沙，

There are some cases that are neither long offenses nor long nights, when a monk commits a Sanghabheda offense,

知是罪，不作覆藏心，

knows it is an offense, does not intend to cover it up,

向他人說，更不犯，

tells others about it, and does not commit it again,

是名非罪長亦非夜長。

this is called neither a long offense nor a long night.



是中罪長夜不長、罪亦長夜亦長者，行波利婆沙時，當少與食、多與作務。
For those whose offenses are not long or are both long and serious, when they are serving disciplinary probation, they should be given less food and more work.

若故不止者，當使淨人縛手脚著床，應語言：「若更犯者，僧復重治汝。」
If they persistently refuse to stop, a pure person should bind their hands and feet to the bed saying, "If you commit further offenses, the assembly will punish you again."

是名比舍遮脚。
This is called a restraint by binding.



或有罪合非夜合、
Sometimes a crime is not related to the night,

或有夜合非罪合、
Sometimes the night is not related to a crime,

或有罪合夜亦合、
Sometimes a crime and the night are related,

或有非罪合亦非夜合。
Sometimes neither a crime nor the night is related.




罪合非夜合者，比丘犯十僧伽婆尸沙，
This means that when a monk commits one of the ten Sanghādisesa offenses,

一切十夜覆，僧合與百夜別住羯磨。
all of which require a ten-night cover, the Sangha must perform an act of reconciliation that involves a hundred-day temporary seclusion.

比丘言：「長老！我羸病不堪，得與略行波利婆沙。」
A monk might say, "Venerable Sir, I am weak and ill, can I perform a simplified version of the Pārājika expiation?"

不應語言：「得百夜羯磨合作十夜別住。」
It should not be said, "You can perform the hundred-night karmavācanā and be isolated for just ten nights."

是名罪合非夜合。
This is defined as merging offenses with invalid periods.




夜合非罪合者，比丘犯十僧伽婆尸沙，
The merging at night that is not a fault occurs when a monk commits one of the ten Sanghadisesa offenses.

一切十夜覆，僧合與十夜別住。
All are concealed for ten nights, and the sangha gathers and stays separately for ten nights. 

比丘言：「長老！我慚愧，我欲廣行波利婆沙。」
The monk says, "Elder! I am ashamed, and I want to practice openly the Parajika."

應語言：「得。」
The response should be, "You may."

是名夜合非罪合。
This is called the merging at night that is not a fault.




罪合夜亦合者，比丘犯十僧伽婆尸沙，十夜覆藏，僧合與作十夜別住，是名罪合夜亦合。

When the offense and night both come together, a monk commits ten severe offenses, covering them for ten nights, the monks provide ten separate nights of dwelling, this is called offense and night both coming together.




非罪合非夜合者，各各別作波利婆沙羯磨，
If it is not a combination of guilt or night, each separately performs the Polivasa Karma,

是名非罪合非夜合。
this is called a non-guilt and non-night combination.




摩訶僧祇律卷第二十五
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll 25




