orry for the confusion, but I need the text you want translated to do the task. Please provide the lines of text to be translated


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
[Scripture Information] Taisho Revised Tripitaka Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




#【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

#【Version History】Release Date: 2024-08, Last Update: 2024-07-12




【编辑说明】本数据库由 财团法人佛教电子佛典基金会（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏经」所编辑

[Editorial Note] This database was edited by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō.




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供

[Original Data] Provided by the esteemed Xiao Zhengu

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Jaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain esteemed individual in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchan with new punctuation




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Matters] This database can be freely circulated for free. For detailed content, please refer to the [Buddhist e-Tripitaka Foundation Database Copyright Declaration].




orry, I don't have the specific lines you want translated. Please provide the text you need translated, and I will be happy to help


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十九東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
The Mahasanghika Vinaya, Scroll Twenty-Nine, Translated by Buddha Bhadra and Faxian from the Eastern Jin Dynasty of Tianzhu.




明雜誦跋渠法之七
Ming Za Song Ba Qu Fa Zhi Qi




復次佛遊俱薩羅國。
Moreover, the Buddha traveled to the state of Kosala.

爾時諸比丘持和上、阿闍梨衣鉢在前，去界內聚坐待師，畏失依止故不出界。
At that time, the monks, holding the robes and alms bowls of their preceptors and teachers in front of them, gathered and sat within the boundaries, waiting for the teacher, fearing the loss of their dependence and thus not leaving the boundary.

佛知而故問：「此是何等比丘聚坐？」
The Buddha knew and deliberately asked: "What kind of monks are gathered here?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks explained the circumstances fully to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「此非是離依止，待如來俱薩羅國遊行還舍衛城時語我，當為諸弟子制捨依止法。」
The Buddha said to the monks: "This is not a release from dependence. When I return to the city of Sravasti after traveling in the state of Kosala, tell me, and I will establish the rule for renouncing dependence for the disciples."

佛還舍衛城，諸比丘以上因緣具白世尊：「今正是時，唯願世尊為諸比丘制捨依止法。」
When the Buddha returned to Sravasti, the monks explained the previous circumstances to the Blessed One and said: "Now is the right time, we earnestly wish the Blessed One to establish the rule for renouncing dependence for the monks."

佛告諸比丘：「若和上命終時離依止，若罷道、被舉、和上出界宿、若共住弟子出界宿，是名離依止。
The Buddha said to the monks: "If a preceptor passes away, if one gives up the path, is expelled, if the preceptor leaves the boundary to stay, or if a cohabiting disciple leaves the boundary to stay, that is called a release from dependence.

若依止阿闍梨、若命終、罷道、被舉、若出界宿、若依止弟子出界宿、若滿五歲善知法善知毘尼，得離依止，是名捨依止。
If one depends on a teacher, if they die, give up the path, are expelled, or leave the boundary to stay, if a dependent disciple leaves the boundary to stay, or if one has thoroughly understood the Dharma and Vinaya for five years, they are allowed to release their dependence, that is called renouncing dependence.

若比丘不善知法、不善知毘尼、不能自立、不能立他，如是比丘盡壽應依止住。
If a monk does not thoroughly understand the Dharma, does not understand the Vinaya, cannot stand on their own, nor establish others, such a monk should depend for life.

若比丘滿十歲善知法、善知比尼、能自立復能立他，如是比丘得受人依止。」
If a monk has mastered the Dharma and Vinaya for ten years, and can stand on their own and establish others, such a monk is allowed to be depended upon by others."

是名和上、阿闍梨共住弟子依止弟子法。
This is named the preceptor and teacher cohabiting disciple dependence rule.



沙彌法者，世尊不樂欲，父母愛重為之泣淚，臨得轉輪王捨家出家，乃至尊者羅睺羅出家因緣應廣說。
As for the novice monk, the World Honored One was not fond of desire. His loving parents wept for him, but when he was on the verge of becoming a wheel-turning king, he left the household life. This is the context in which the venerable Rāhula should broadly explain his renunciation.

佛告舍利弗：「汝去度羅睺羅出家。」
The Buddha told Śāriputra, "Go and assist Rāhula in renouncing."

舍利弗言：「我云何度羅睺羅出家？」
Śāriputra said, "How should I assist Rāhula in renouncing?"

佛言：「汝往教言：『我羅睺羅，歸依佛、歸依法、歸依僧。』如是三說。」
The Buddha said, "Go and instruct him: 'I, Rāhula, take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.' Say this three times."

『我羅睺羅，歸依佛竟、歸依法竟、歸依僧竟，盡壽不殺生、不盜、不邪婬、不妄語、不飲酒。』
'I, Rāhula, having taken refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, vow for life not to kill, not to steal, not to engage in illicit sex, not to lie, and not to drink alcohol.'

佛婆伽婆出家，我羅睺羅隨佛出家。』
The Buddha, the Blessed One, has renounced the world, and I, Rāhula, follow him in renunciation.

如是三說。
Say this three times.

『佛婆伽婆出家，我羅睺羅隨佛出家，捨俗服著袈裟，盡壽不殺生持沙彌戒；盡壽不盜持沙彌戒；盡壽不婬持沙彌戒；盡壽不妄語持沙彌戒；盡壽不飲酒持沙彌戒；盡壽不著華香持沙彌戒；盡壽不觀聽歌舞作樂持沙彌戒；盡壽不坐臥高廣床上持沙彌戒；盡壽不過時食持沙彌戒；盡壽不得捉金銀及錢持沙彌戒。如是憶念持。』
'The Buddha, the Blessed One, has renounced, and I, Rāhula, follow him in renunciation, giving up worldly clothes and wearing the robe. For life, I vow to uphold the novice precepts: not to kill, not to steal, not to engage in sex, not to lie, not to drink alcohol, not to adorn oneself with garlands or perfumes, not to attend dancing, singing, or music performances, not to use high and large beds, not to eat after midday, and not to accept gold, silver, or money. Remember and uphold these precepts.'



衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and spoke extensively as above.

爾時尊者阿難，有一知識檀越家，合門疫病死盡，唯有一小兒在，恒在市肆前拾粒自活。
At that time, Venerable Ānanda had a noble benefactor's family, where every member had died of an epidemic, leaving only a small child who constantly picked up grain in front of the markets to survive.

時尊者阿難行過時，小兒見已隨後而喚翁翁，阿難不聞遂去，為世人譏嫌言：「云何沙門釋子他有父時，強親如父如子，今見衰喪而不顧錄。」
As Venerable Ānanda walked by, the child saw him and followed, calling "Uncle, Uncle". Ānanda did not hear and left, resulting in people criticizing: "How can a disciple of the recluse Gautama ignore the suffering of others as if they were not related?"

小兒追喚不已，阿難顧視識之，呼言：「子來。」
The child continued to call out persistently, and Ānanda, upon noticing, recognized him and said, "Come, child."

時小兒隨後入祇洹精舍。
The child then followed him into the Jetavana Monastery.

佛見已知而故問：「是誰小兒？」
The Buddha saw him and, knowing, asked intentionally, "Whose child is this?"

阿難以上因緣具白世尊：「此小兒得出家不？」
Ānanda explained the circumstances to the Blessed One, asking, "Can this child be ordained?"

佛告阿難：「汝作何心？」答言：「慈愍心。」
The Buddha told Ānanda, "What is your intention?" He replied, "A heart of compassion."

佛言：「得出家。」
The Buddha said, "He may be ordained."

「世尊當云何與出家？」如上羅睺羅出家中廣說。
"How should the Blessed One give him ordination?" It is extensively explained in the ordination of Rāhula as above.


衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, and he expounded extensively as mentioned above.

爾時有摩訶羅出家，聚落中安居竟，欲詣世尊問訊，將十沙彌。
At that time, a monk named Mahārā was staying in a village. After the retreat, he wished to visit the World-Honored One and brought ten novice monks with him.

爾時世尊在露處坐。
At that time, the World-Honored One was sitting in an open place.

摩訶羅遙見世尊！便指語諸沙彌言：「是汝祖翁。」
Mahārā saw the World-Honored One from afar and pointedly said to the novices, "That is your Grandfather."

時諸小沙彌競前趣佛，或捉床座、或牽捉衣、或摩足、或捉澡罐，
The young novices rushed forward toward the Buddha, some grabbing the seat, some tugging at his clothes, some massaging his feet, and others holding the bathing jug.

佛知而故問：「是誰沙彌？」
The Buddha was aware but deliberately asked, "Whose novices are these?"

答言：「是我許。」
They replied, "They are mine, Sir."

佛言：「汝云何多度沙彌？從今日後不聽畜眾。」
The Buddha said, "Why do you ordain so many novices? From today onwards, you are not allowed to keep a group."

若畜一極至三聽畜，若大德比丘多人宗重，應語：「與餘人。」
If one has up to three novices, it is allowed. If a great monk is respected by many, he should say, "Give them to others."

復白言：「我知有餘人，但欲在阿闍梨下受誦經法增長修學，是故與阿闍梨。」
He then further explained, "I know there are others, but they wish to study and recite the scriptures under the ācārya for the sake of progress; that is why they are with the ācārya."

如是應語：「與餘人，得自教詔。」
You should thus instruct, "Give them to others, allowing self-teaching and guidance."

若畜眾沙彌，得越毘尼罪。
Keeping a large group of novices results in a violation of the Vinaya


衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was staying in the city of Śrāvastī and expounded as above.

爾時有比丘將一沙彌歸看親里，路經曠野，
At that time, a monk took a novice back to visit his relatives, and on their way passed through a wilderness.

中道有非人化作龍右遶沙彌，以華散上，
In the middle of the road, a non-human transformed into a dragon, circled around the novice on the right, and scattered flowers upon him,

讚言：「善哉！大得善利，捨家出家不捉金銀及錢。」
praising, "Well done! You have gained great benefit by renouncing home and not grasping gold and silver or money."

比丘到親里家，問訊已欲還時，
When the monk reached his relatives' home, after inquiring about their well-being, he was about to return.

親里婦言：「汝今還去道逈多乏，
A female relative said, "On your way back, the road is long and lacking in supplies.

可持是錢去市易所須。」
You may take this money to the market to exchange for what you need."

沙彌受取繫著衣頭而去，
The novice received it, tied it to his garment, and left.

中道非人見沙彌持錢在比丘後行，
In the middle of the road, the non-human saw the novice holding money and walking behind the monk.

復化作龍來左遶沙彌，以土坌上，
The non-human transformed again into a dragon, circled around the novice on the left, and threw dirt on him,

說是言：「汝失善利，出家修道而捉錢行。」
saying, "You have lost your good fortune by renouncing home for cultivation yet carrying money."

沙彌便啼。
The novice then cried.

比丘顧視問沙彌：「汝何故啼？」
The monk looked back and asked the novice, "Why are you crying?"

沙彌言：「我不憶有過，無故得惱。」
The novice said, "I don't recall any fault, yet I am troubled for no reason."

師言：「汝有所捉耶？」
The teacher asked, "Are you holding something?"

答言：「持是錢來。」
He replied, "I am carrying this money."

師言：「捨棄。」
The teacher said, "Discard it."

棄已，非人復如前供養。
After discarding it, the non-human again offered respect as before.

比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monk, because of this incident, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽沙彌持金銀錢。」
The Buddha said, "From today onward, novices shall not hold gold, silver, or money."

若比丘使沙彌最初捉金銀錢者，
If a monk makes a novice hold gold, silver, or money initially,

得越毘尼罪。
he commits a pārājika offense (a serious misconduct).

若見沙彌先已捉，後使捉者無罪。
If he sees a novice already holding it and then makes him hold it again, there is no offense.



衛城，為諸天世人之所供養，廣說如上。  
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī, being venerated by gods and humans, and widely expounded as above.

爾時尊者大目連，共專頭沙彌，食後到閻浮提阿耨大池上坐禪。  
At that time, Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, along with the novice Upali, went to the Anavatapta Lake in Jambudvīpa after eating to meditate.

時專頭沙彌見池邊金沙，便作是念：「我今當盛是沙，可著世尊澡罐下。」  
Then the novice Upali saw golden sands by the shore and thought, "I should collect this sand and place it under the World-Honored One's bath pot."

尊者目連從禪覺，即以神足乘虛而還。  
Venerable Maudgalyāyana arose from meditation, and immediately used his miraculous powers to return through the air.

時專頭沙彌為非人所持，時目連迴見喚沙彌來，答言：「我不能得往。」  
At that time, the novice was seized by a non-human entity. When Maudgalyāyana called him to return, he responded, "I cannot come back."

問：「汝有所持耶？」答言：「持是金沙。」  
He asked, "Are you holding something?" The reply was, "I am holding this golden sand."

「汝應捨棄。」捨已即乘虛而去。  
"You should abandon it." Once he released it, he traveled through the air and left.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。  
The monks reported the whole incident to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽沙彌捉金銀及錢。」  
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, novices are not allowed to hold gold, silver, or money."  




復次佛住迦維羅衛尼拘律樹釋氏精舍。
Once the Buddha was residing in Kapilavastu at the Nigrodha garden in the house of the Shakya clan.

諸檀越設供飯僧，時有沙彌在中逐鳥驅蠅，並拾遺飯骨菜菓蓏而噉。
At that time, the lay supporters were offering meals to the monks. There was a novice among them chasing birds and flies, picking up leftover food, bones, vegetables, and fruits to eat.

時有諸母人情多憐愍，見已作如是言：「沙門釋子無有慈心，食不平等，如畜犢子先乳後𤚲。
Some mothers, out of compassion, remarked upon seeing him, "The Sramana, the Shakya’s son, lacks compassion and fairness in food distribution, like one who feeds a calf before its mother.

而今比丘畜此小兒，獨食不與。此壞敗人，何道之有？」
Now, the monks raise this child, eating alone without sharing. What path does such a ruinous person have?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks informed the Blessed One about this situation.

佛言：「從今日後出家人食應等與。」
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, ordained persons should distribute food equally."

沙彌法者。
Thus is the rule for novices.

沙彌有三品：一者從七歲至十三，名為驅烏沙彌。
Novices are of three types: First, from ages seven to thirteen, they are called bird-chasing novices.

二者從十四至十九，是名應法沙彌。
Second, from ages fourteen to nineteen, they are called rule-abiding novices.

三者從二十上至七十，是名名字沙彌。
Third, from ages twenty to seventy, they are called name-only novices.

是三品皆名沙彌。
These three categories are all termed novices.

爾時尊者優波離，知時而問世尊：「沙彌云何與安居衣分？」
Then Venerable Upali, knowing the right time, asked the Blessed One, "How should novices receive their share of robes during the rains retreat?"

佛言：「若得比丘意應與，若半、若三分之一。
The Buddha said, "If the monks agree, they should be given either half or one-third.

得比丘意者，持戒能作淨事。」
Monks' agreement means it is achieved through maintaining precepts and pure conduct."

優波離復白佛言：「云何與沙彌非時衣分？」
Upali further asked the Buddha, "How should the division of out-of-season robes be done for novices?"

佛言：「等與。」
The Buddha replied, "Distribute equally."

若沙彌得多衣，畏作非法去者，若與半、若與三分之一。
If a novice receives many more robes, fearing unauthorized actions, they should be given half or one-third.

若彼和上、阿闍梨言：「等與。」
If their preceptor or teacher says, "Distribute equally,"

是沙彌無他，應隨師語與。
then there is no other rule for novices; they should follow the teacher's words and share.

亡人衣分亦如是。
The distribution of robes from deceased persons should be the same.

是名沙彌法。
This is called the rule for novices.



鉢法者，佛住尸利曼荼羅林中成佛不久，時有商人，一名帝隸浮裟，二名跋梨伽。

The bowl law was established when the Buddha was staying in the Shirimanda Forest not long after his enlightenment; at that time, there were merchants, one named Dili Fushe, and the other named Balijia.

應廣說乃至持麨蜜往詣世尊。

They were encouraged to offer various things and even brought flour and honey to visit the World-Honored One.

世尊作是念：「過去諸如來、應供、正遍知，為手受食、為器受食耶？」

The World-Honored One thought, "In the past, the Tathagatas, Worthy of Offerings, Perfectly Enlightened Ones, did they receive food directly by hand or use a vessel?"

作是念已，時四大天王各持金鉢來奉世尊。

After thinking this, the Four Great Heavenly Kings each brought a golden bowl to present to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「不應受如是銀鉢，一切寶鉢皆不應受。」

The Buddha said, "It is not appropriate to accept such silver bowls; all precious bowls should not be accepted."

復各持石鉢來，佛復作是念：「若受一鉢，恐諸王意不悅。」

Then they each brought stone bowls, and the Buddha thought again, "If I receive just one bowl, it might displease the other Kings."

即時受四鉢，累置左手中，右手按之合成一鉢，令四際現。

Immediately, he accepted the four bowls, stacked them in his left hand, and pressed them with his right hand to merge them into one bowl, so that the four edges appeared.

佛受鉢已，受商人麨蜜，廣說呪願。

After the Buddha received the bowl, he accepted the merchants' flour and honey and spoke at length in blessing wishes.

爾時商人歡喜，前白佛言：「願賜爪髮還起支提。」

At that time, the merchants were joyful and said to the Buddha, "May we be granted nails and hair to create a stupa?"

佛即剪爪剃髮與之起塔。

The Buddha then clipped his nails and cut his hair to give them to build a stupa.




復次佛住孫婆白土聚落，爾時孫婆天神來至佛所，白佛言：「世尊！
Once again, the Buddha was staying in the village of Sunpavastu, at that time, a deity from Sunpavastu approached the Buddha and said: "Bhagavan!

是中過去諸如來、應供、正遍知受用此間瓦鉢，
In the past, Tathagatas, worthy of offerings, perfectly enlightened ones accepted clay bowls here,

唯願世尊聽諸比丘受用瓦鉢。」
I sincerely wish that the Bhagavan allows the monks to use clay bowls."

佛言：「從今日後聽受用瓦鉢。」
The Buddha said: "From today onward, using clay bowls is allowed."




復次佛住舍衛城，

Again, the Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī,

爾時有比丘往至法豫瓦師所，作如是言：「長壽！為我作鉢。」

At that time, a monk went to the potter Dharmaprepa and said, "Long life! Make a bowl for me."

爾時作好瓦鉢，令色如金與比丘，佛言：「不聽作金色。」

The potter made a good clay bowl with a golden color and gave it to the monk, but the Buddha said, "It is not permitted to make it in golden color."

復作銀色，佛言：「不聽作銀色。」

The potter then made it in silver color, and the Buddha said, "It is not permitted to make it in silver color."

佛語諸比丘：「今是齋日，喚法豫優婆塞，洗浴著淨衣受布薩。」

The Buddha told the monks, "Today is Uposatha, call the lay disciple Dharmaprepa, have him bathe, dress in clean clothes, and receive the Uposatha."

時優婆塞洗浴著淨衣，來至佛所受布薩已，世尊示土處：

The lay disciple then bathed, dressed in clean clothes, came to the Buddha and received the Uposatha, and the World-Honored One pointed to a piece of earth:

「汝知是土，如是和、如是打、如是埏、如是作、如是熏作鉢。

"You know this earth; thus mix, thus mold, thus shape, thus make, thus fire to make a bowl.

熏作鉢成就已，作三種色：

Once the bowl is fired and completed, it should have three kinds of color:

一者如孔雀咽色；

First, like the color of a peacock's neck;

二者如毘陵伽鳥色；

Second, like the color of a Brāhmiṇy duck;

三者如鴿色。」

Third, like the color of a pigeon."

佛言：「熏時當伺候，使作如是色。」

The Buddha said, "At the time of firing, ensure it takes on such colors."




復次佛住舍衛城，爾時有比丘，
At that time, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, and there was a monk,

優婆尸婆國土持鉢來，白佛言：「世尊！聽用是鉢不？」
who came from the land of Uposatha carrying a bowl and said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! May I use this bowl?"

佛言：「聽用。」
The Buddha said, "You may use it."

如是迦絺耶國持鉢來，佛言：「聽用。」
Similarly, a monk came from the country of Kachaya carrying a bowl, and the Buddha said, "You may use it."

北方比丘持赤鉢來，白佛言：「聽用是鉢不？」
A monk from the northern region came with a red bowl and asked, "May I use this bowl?"

佛言：「不聽用。」
The Buddha said, "You may not use it."




復次佛住舍衛城，五事利益故，如來、應供、正遍知五日一行諸比丘房，見一比丘痏手，
Furthermore, when the Buddha was staying in Shravasti for the benefit of five things, he, the Tathagata, worthy of offerings, and all-knowing, would visit the monks' quarters every five days and saw a monk with an injured hand.

佛知而故問：「比丘！汝安樂不？」
The Buddha, aware of this, asked, "Monk, are you well?"

答言：「世尊！我手痏，失鉢墮地，破鉢故是以不樂。」
He replied, "World-Honored One! My hand is injured, I dropped my bowl and it broke, so I am not happy."

佛言：「從今日後聽諸比丘用鐵鉢。
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, monks are permitted to use iron bowls.

用鐵鉢時，應作鉢爐熏，熏時當用阿摩勒核、佉陀羅核、巨摩、竹根熏。」
When using iron bowls, they should be treated with a bowl furnace and fumigated, using amalaka seeds, khadira seeds, gum, and bamboo roots."



舍城，爾時王阿闍世作大新堂竟，作如是念：「此堂誰能知其過失？

Furthermore, the Buddha resided in the city of Rajagriha. At that time, King Ajatashatru had just completed a grand new hall and thought to himself, "Who can discern the flaws of this hall?

唯有諸沙門釋子，聰明智慧能知此過失。」

Only the Shramana descendants of the Shakya, with their wisdom and intelligence, can identify any flaws."

又作是念：「我不可直喚諸比丘來看此堂，正當設會，處處著人微聽所說。」

He further thought, "I should not directly invite the monks to inspect the hall, but rather hold a gathering and discreetly place people to listen to what is said."

爾時諸比丘來入，有一比丘作是言：「此堂都好，唯一角差降一𪍿麥許。」

When the monks arrived, one of them remarked, "The hall is excellent, except for one corner, which is slightly lower by a barley grain's width."

復有一比丘作是言：「此堂都好，唯閣道上戶楣額太下，王剎利種羽儀扇蓋不得平行出入。」

Another monk said, "This hall is excellent, but the lintel of the upper gate is too low for the royal Kshatriya's ceremonial fans and canopies to pass through evenly."

時有一摩訶羅比丘，見地斷材頭，作是念：「此好，可作鉢。」

At that time, a Mahakalas monk saw a piece of sawn-off wood on the ground and thought, "This is good; it could be made into a bowl."

比丘食訖還去，爾時諸人各白王所聞。

After the monks had eaten and left, the people reported what they had heard to the king.

王即喚巧匠以綖量度，如說無異，即勅巧匠使令改之。

The king called upon skilled craftsmen to measure with a string, finding no deviations from the said comments, and thus instructed the craftsmen to make the corrections.

王憶摩訶羅語，「諸比丘故當須鉢。」

The king recalled the words of Mahakalas, "The monks indeed need a bowl."

即喚巧師旋作木鉢，作種種飯食盛滿鉢。

He immediately summoned skilled artisans to quickly carve wooden bowls, filling them with various foods.

復持瓦鉢、鐵鉢盛滿飯食，遣人送往奉上世尊。

Then, he filled clay and iron bowls with food and sent people to present them to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「不聽用木鉢，受垢膩故，亦是外道幖幟，故不得受。」

The Buddha said, "Wooden bowls are not permitted, as they absorb impurities and grease, and they are also a symbol of non-Buddhist paths, thus they cannot be accepted."

此中淨者世尊即受，不淨者不受。

Among these, the pure ones were accepted by the World-Honored One, while the impure ones were not accepted.




舍城，爾時阿闍世王未與毘舍離離車有怨，時南國商人持一段摩尼來與王。
Moreover, when the Buddha was residing in Rajagriha, at that time, King Ajatashatru had not yet harbored any enmity towards the Licchavis of Vaishali. A merchant from the southern country brought a piece of mani gem to the king.

阿闍世得已作是念：「此寶是諸舅所須。」即遣人送與離車。
King Ajatashatru, having received it, thought, "This treasure is needed by my maternal uncles." So he sent someone to deliver it to the Licchavis.

離車得已作是念：「此寶不可分。」即著摩尼庫中。
Having received it, the Licchavis thought, "This treasure should not be divided." So they placed it in the mani treasury.

離車後行諸庫，見摩尼已，「此寶可中作器飲釋伽羅漿。」
Later, when the Licchavis were going through various treasuries and saw the mani, they thought, "This treasure could be made into a vessel for drinking sakara juice."

即喚摩尼師來作器。器成偶似鉢形，離車作是念：「此是出家人器，非俗人所宜，應與薩遮尼揵子。」
So they called an artisan to make a vessel. When the vessel was made, by chance it resembled a begging bowl, and the Licchavis thought, "This is a vessel suitable for renunciants, not for laypeople. It should be given to the child of Susunaga."

復有言：「應與姊子尼健。」復有言：「何故與是噉酒糟驢？應與世尊。」
There were others who said, "It should be given to the nephew Nigrodha." Yet others said, "Why give it to this donkey who eats wine dregs? It should be given to the World Honored One."

如是眾多各各不同，即行籌取定，與佛者多。
Thus, there were many differing opinions, so they cast lots to decide, and many pointed towards giving it to the Buddha.

眾人議言：「我等不可空鉢與佛，應當莊嚴校飾。」
The people discussed, saying, "We cannot give just an empty bowl to the Buddha. It should be adorned and embellished."

即以碎寶滿鉢置寶籠中。
So they filled the bowl with pieces of treasure and placed it in a treasure chest.

復持瓦鉢、鐵鉢盛種種食奉獻世尊。
They also brought clay bowls and iron bowls filled with various foods to present to the World Honored One.

佛語諸離車：「此摩尼鉢不應受，是中碎寶及寶籠亦不應受。聽鐵鉢、瓦鉢，不聽寶鉢。淨者應受，不淨者不應受。」
The Buddha said to the Licchavis, "This mani bowl should not be accepted, nor should the broken treasures and treasure chest it contains be accepted. Iron and clay bowls are permissible, but not precious ones. Pure offerings should be accepted, impure ones should not."

離車即持寶鉢還歸，眾人議言：「應與姊子尼犍。」
The Licchavis then took the precious bowl back, and the people discussed, saying, "It should be given to the nephew Nigrodha."

復有人言：「是噉酒糟驢，不應與寶籠及碎寶，應作繩絡囊盛空鉢與。」
Then someone said, "This donkey who eats wine dregs should not be given the treasure chest and broken treasures. A woven bag should be made to hold the empty bowl to give him."

即作繩絡盛空鉢，遣人送與。
Thus, they made a woven bag to hold the empty bowl and sent it to him.

時有一離車信敬尼揵，先往具白此事：「彼送鉢來者，慎莫與受。」
At that time, a Licchavi who had faith and respect for Nigrodha went ahead to report this matter, saying, "When they send the bowl, be careful not to accept it."

鉢至已，尼犍言：「是空鉢不應受，麻繩作絡亦不應受。先與瞿曇沙門後與我，故亦不應受。」
When the bowl arrived, Nigrodha said, "This empty bowl should not be accepted, and the hemp rope woven bag should not be accepted either. Since it was given to the Shramana Gautama before me, it should not be accepted."

我今唯受一事，若截諸年少離車舌，合鹽油熬，盛滿鉢來我當受。」
I will only accept one thing: if you cut the tongues of the young Licchavis, boil them with salt and oil, fill the bowl with such and then I will accept it."

信還具白諸離車。
The believer returned and fully reported this to the Licchavis.

諸離車言：「此是我姊子，怨傷故作是言耳，但當送與。」
The Licchavis said, "This is my nephew, he speaks thus out of malice. Just send it."

如是三反，所言不異。
Thus, thrice they sent it, and the words remained unchanged.

諸離車言：「此是奇事，我以厚施，反生怨毒。」
The Licchavis said, "This is a strange matter. I offer abundantly, yet it breeds resentment."

即遣人往持搏打殺。
Thereupon, they sent someone to go beat and kill him.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊：「云何薩遮尼揵子坐舌害身？」
The monks, due to this cause, informed the World Honored One: "Why does the child of Susunaga suffer bodily harm because of his tongue?"

佛言：「非但今日坐舌害身，如《舉吉羅本生經》中廣說，《巔多利鳥生經》中說、如《鼈生經》中說、如《鸚鵡生經》中說。」
The Buddha said, "Not only today does he suffer bodily harm because of his tongue, as is extensively explained in the Jataka tales, such as in the story of the Tundila bird, the turtle story, and the parrot story.


復次佛住舍衛城，爾時有比丘，鉢中安隔盛種種食。
Additionally, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, there was a monk who arranged his meals in compartments within his bowl.

佛知而故問：「比丘！汝鉢中作何等？」
The Buddha knowingly asked, "Monk! What are you doing in your bowl?"

答言：「世尊！是中一處安飯、一處安羹、一處安肉菜。」
He answered, "World Honored One! One compartment holds rice, another soup, and another meat and vegetables."

佛言：「汝貪著種種味耶？從今日不聽鉢中安隔，若安隔者越比尼罪。
The Buddha said, "Do you desire to savor various flavors? From today on, it is not allowed to use compartments in bowls, and doing so incurs a Vinaya offense.

若以餅隔及飯隔者無罪。」
However, using bread or rice to separate food is not an offense."

復有比丘，用生鉢食故而吐，佛言：「應熏，當用阿摩勒核、熏佉陀羅核、巨摩、竹根熏。」
There was another monk who vomited because of using a raw bowl; the Buddha said, "It should be smoked with amla seeds, kutjara seeds, black mustard, or bamboo root."

爾時諸比丘鉢底盡，佛言：「底應安曼荼羅鍱。」
At that time, the bowls of many monks had worn-out bottoms, and the Buddha said, "A mandala plate should be placed at the bottom."

爾時諸比丘用金銀寶物作，佛言：「不應用金銀作，應用赤銅、白鑞、鉛錫。」
Some monks made them from gold and silver treasures, and the Buddha said, "They should not be made from gold or silver, but from red copper, white bronze, lead, or pewter."

爾時諸比丘盡通遍覆鉢，佛言：「不聽一切盡覆，極大者去緣四指，極小者如尸舍樹葉。」
Then, some monks completely covered their bowls, and the Buddha said, "It is not permissible to cover them entirely: large ones should be left four fingers away from the edge, and smaller ones should be like a teak leaf."

諸比丘曼荼羅上作鳥獸形像，佛言：「不聽作鳥獸形像。若作鉢鍱者，若方、若圓。」
Some monks created bird and animal shapes on the mandala, and the Buddha said, "Do not make bird or animal shapes. Plates for bowls should be square or round."

曼荼羅法者，若鉢無曼荼羅不得著地。
According to the mandala rule, if a bowl has no mandala, it should not be placed on the ground.

若著地者，得越毘尼罪；應著鉢支上、若葉若草上。
If one places it on the ground, it incurs a Vinaya offense; it should be placed on a bowl stand, or on leaves or grass.

若鉢安曼荼羅者，著地無罪。
If a bowl with a mandala is placed on the ground, it incurs no offense.

若泥地曼荼羅者，著地無罪。
If the mandala is muddy, it incurs no offense when placed on the ground.

下至水灑地安鉢無罪。
Putting a bowl on a wetted ground incurs no offense.

若停鉢置地者，越毘尼罪。是名鉢法。
However, leaving bowls directly on the ground is a Vinaya offense. This is called the bowl regulation.



粥法者，佛住舍衛城，時城內難陀母、憂婆斯荼羅母半月中三受布薩，八日十四日、十五日、布薩日作食，先飯比丘後自食，至明日復作布薩食，作釜飯逼上飯汁自飲，即覺身中內風除、宿食消，覺飢須食，作是念：「阿闍梨是一食人，應當須粥。」

Porridge practice is that when the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, within the city the mothers of Nanda and Uposatha practiced Uposatha three times during half a month, on the eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth day. On Uposatha days, they would prepare food, first offering it to the monks before eating themselves. On the following day, they would again prepare Uposatha food, boiling rice porridge and drinking the rice broth, feeling their internal winds subside and stagnant food dissipate. Feeling hungry, they thought, "The master is someone who eats one meal a day and should have porridge."

取多水著少米，合煎去兩分，然後內胡椒蓽茇。

They took a large amount of water and a small amount of rice, boiled it down by two parts, and then added pepper and other spices.

粥熟已盛滿甕，持詣祇洹精舍。

When the porridge was done, they filled a jar with it and took it to Jetavana monastery.

至已稽首佛足，却住一面白佛言：「唯願世尊聽諸比丘食粥。」

Upon arrival, they bowed at the Buddha's feet, stood to one side, and said to the Buddha, "We wish that the World-Honored One would allow the monks to eat porridge."

佛言：「從今日後聽食粥。」

The Buddha said, "From today onward, I permit the eating of porridge."

其日有檀越，精舍中飯僧。諸比丘心生疑：「世尊制戒不得處處食，我等云何作淨得食？」

That day a lay supporter provided food for the monks at the monastery. The monks began to doubt, thinking, "The World-Honored One established a rule not to eat indiscriminately; how can we purify and eat?"

佛言：「若粥初出釜，畫不成字者，是非處處食、非別眾食、非滿足食。

The Buddha replied, "If the porridge, when first drawn from the pot, cannot be written with, it is not considered indiscriminate eating, not separate gathering food, nor sufficient food.

若粥初出釜，畫成字者，名處處食，亦名別眾食、滿足食。」

If the porridge, when first drawn from the pot, can be written with, it is considered indiscriminate eating, separate gathering food, and sufficient food."

爾時世尊說偈呪願：

At that time, the World-Honored One recited a verse of blessing:




持戒清淨人所奉，  
Respected by those who uphold purity and morality,

恭敬隨時以粥施，  
Reverently offer porridge at all times,




十利饒益於行者，  
Ten benefits are bestowed on practitioners,

色力壽樂辭清辯，  
Appearance, strength, longevity, happiness, eloquence,



宿食風除飢渴消，
Eating habits dispel hunger and thirst,

是名為藥佛所說；
This is what the Medicine Buddha preaches.




欲生人天常受樂，  
If you wish to be born in the realm of humans and gods and constantly enjoy happiness,  

應當以粥施眾僧。  
you should offer porridge to the community of monks.  




遊行。
Buddha was traveling in the country of Kosala.

漸漸至呵帝欽婆羅門聚落應廣說。
Gradually, he reached the Brahmin settlement of Hadiqin and was expected to speak extensively.

乃至婆羅門車載粳米、豆、胡麻、酥油、石蜜。
Even to the point where the Brahmin loaded carts with rice, beans, sesame seeds, ghee, stone honey.

隨逐世尊六月中，欲伺無人作供時我當作供。
He followed the World Honored One for six months, intending to make an offering when no one else did.

佛在世人民信心歡喜多設供養，前食、後食都無空缺。
When Buddha was in the world, people, joyful and faithful, made numerous offerings, with no lack of food for anyone.

世尊還舍衛城，時婆羅門家遣信來追，種作時至宜應速還。
When the World Honored One returned to Shravasti, the Brahmin family sent a message to catch up, saying the farming season was coming and he should hurry back.

時婆羅門問尊者阿難：「世尊明日從何門出趣舍衛城？」
At that time, the Brahmin asked Venerable Ananda: "Through which gate will the World Honored One leave for Shravasti tomorrow?"

阿難言：「婆羅門汝何故問？」
Ananda asked: "Why do you ask, Brahmin?"

婆羅門言：「我所有米豆欲散道中，願佛比丘僧蹈上而去，便為受用。」
The Brahmin said: "I wish to scatter my rice and beans on the road so that the Buddha and the monks may walk on them and use them."

阿難言：「婆羅門須我問佛。」
Ananda said: "I must ask the Buddha, Brahmin."

爾時尊者阿難以是因緣具白世尊。
At that time, Venerable Ananda explained this matter to the World Honored One.

佛言：「阿難！誰曾教化受彼供養？」
The Buddha asked: "Ananda, who has previously taught and accepted offerings from him?"

答言：「尊者舍利弗。」
He answered: "Venerable Sariputra."

佛問舍利弗：「汝曾受彼供養耶？」
Buddha asked Sariputra: "Have you accepted offerings from him?"

「世尊！我曾受彼一食。」
"World Honored One! I have accepted one meal from him."

佛言：「汝即是教化彼者，可往語彼婆羅門，明日能為僧作粥不？」
The Buddha said: "You are the one who taught him. Go and ask that Brahmin if he can make porridge for the monks tomorrow."

舍利弗即往說法，乃至「能為眾僧作粥不？」
Sariputra immediately went to speak Dharma, asking, "Can you make porridge for the monks?"

婆羅門言：「我乃欲以米豆布地令佛及僧蹈上過，作粥何以不能？」
The Brahmin said: "I intended to lay rice and beans on the ground for the Buddha and monks to walk on. Why can't I make porridge?"

即夜辦種種粥：酥粥、乳粥、油粥、酪粥、肉粥、魚粥。
That night, he prepared various kinds of porridge: ghee porridge, milk porridge, oil porridge, curd porridge, meat porridge, fish porridge.

晨朝佛比丘僧坐已，手自行粥。
In the morning, after the Buddha and the monks were seated, he served the porridge himself.

佛知而故問：「米置何處？」
The Buddha, knowing, purposely asked: "Where was the rice placed?"

答言：「此處。」
He answered: "Here."

「何處煮？」
"Where was it cooked?"

答言：「此處。」
He answered: "Here."

佛言：「內宿不聽，內煮亦不聽。聽餘淨粥，不聽是粥。」
The Buddha said: "The rice stayed overnight, and it was cooked there, which is not allowed. Other clean porridge is allowed, but not this porridge."


復次佛俱薩羅國遊行，至故石婆羅門聚落。

Again, the Buddha traveled to the kingdom of Kosala, arriving at the Brāhmaṇa settlement of Gosthivara.

爾時有剃髮師摩訶羅父子，出家住此聚落。

At that time, there was a father and son pair of barbers, named Mahāla, who had renounced the world and lived in this settlement.

時摩訶羅聞世尊來，即語兒言：

When Mahāla heard that the Blessed One was coming, he said to his son:

「汝持剃髮具入聚落，求米、豆、酥、油、石蜜，世尊至當作種種粥。」

"Take the shaving tools and go into the settlement to ask for rice, beans, ghee, oil, and rock sugar; when the Blessed One arrives, we will prepare various kinds of porridge."

兒即入聚落，眾人問言：

The son then went into the settlement, and the people asked him:

「汝剃髮欲得何物？」

"What do you want in exchange for shaving?"

答言：「我須米、豆、酥、油、石蜜。」

He replied, "I need rice, beans, ghee, oil, and rock sugar."

「汝用何為？」

"What will you use them for?"

答言：「明日世尊至，當作種種粥。」

He said, "Tomorrow the Blessed One is coming, so we will make various kinds of porridge."

時諸居士聞已信心歡喜加倍與之，即持還住處。

When the householders heard this, they were filled with faith and joy, and they gave him double; he then brought it back to his dwelling.

世尊至已，摩訶羅自作種種粥，至明旦佛比丘僧坐已，

When the Blessed One arrived, Mahāla himself prepared various kinds of porridge, and the next morning, after the Buddha and the monks were seated,

摩訶羅自洗手躬自行粥，佛知而故問：

Mahāla washed his hands and personally served the porridge, and the Buddha knowingly asked:

「比丘！此何等粥？」

"Monk, what kind of porridge is this?"

答言：「世尊！我本在家時供養諸比丘，常作是念：

He answered, "Blessed One, when I was a layperson I used to offer alms to the monks, always thinking:

『何時當得自手供養世尊？』今故作此粥。」

'When will I have the chance to personally offer food to the Blessed One?' Now I have made this porridge for that reason."

佛言：「何處得米？」

The Buddha said, "Where did you get this rice?"

答言：「小兒客作剃髮得。」

He replied, "My son received it as wages for shaving."

佛言：「內宿不聽、內煮不聽、自煮不聽、客作得亦不聽。

The Buddha said, "Storing overnight is not allowed, cooking for oneself is not allowed, preparing one's own meal is not allowed, and obtaining from wage labor is also not allowed.

聽餘淨粥淨作得食。」

It is allowed to eat clean porridge prepared with pure intentions by others."



多羅國遊行，時雞尼耶螺髻梵志聞世尊來，作種種粥：酥粥胡麻粥、乳粥、酪粥、油粥、魚肉粥。
Furthermore, when the Buddha was traveling in the land of Yangu, a Brahmin named Jiniyeluo learned of the World-Honored One's arrival and prepared various kinds of porridge: butter porridge, sesame porridge, milk porridge, curd porridge, oil porridge, fish and meat porridge.

佛比丘僧坐已行種種粥，諸比丘心生疑：「世尊制戒不得處處食，我等云何得淨而食？」
The Buddha and the assembly of monks sat and were served the various porridges. The monks became doubtful and thought, "The World-Honored One has established a rule not to eat everywhere; how can we eat this food without impurity?"

佛言：「若粥初出釜，畫不成字者聽；除肉粥、魚粥，餘一切粥，非處處食、非別眾食、非滿足食。
The Buddha said, "If the porridge, upon first being taken from the pot, is such that it cannot form characters when drawn, then it is permissible; excluding meat and fish porridge, all other types are not considered eating everywhere, nor eating separately from the assembly, nor eating to satisfaction.

若比丘乞食，煮飯未熟合泔汁𢍶與，食者無罪。
If a monk is begging for food, giving rice that is not fully cooked mixed with thin gruel to eat is without fault.

若但取飯與，食者，名別眾食、處處食、滿足食。」
However, if only rice is given, it is called eating separately from the assembly, eating everywhere, and eating to satisfaction."

是名粥法。
This is called the porridge rule.



餅法者，佛住舍衛城，世尊四月一剃髮，剃髮時世人持種種餅食來看世尊。
Regarding the Way of Pastry, the Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti. The World-Honored One shaved his head once every four months, and at such times, people would bring various pastries to see the World-Honored One.

時有一婆羅門問婦言：「家中有餅具不？」
At that time, a Brahmin asked his wife, "Do we have the ingredients to make pastries at home?"

答言：「有粳米二斗、油四升。用作何等？」
She answered, "We have two dou of glutinous rice and four sheng of oil. What do you want to make?"

答言：「沙門瞿曇今日剃髮，諸人悉持餅往，汝可疾疾作餅，我欲隨伴供養沙門瞿曇。」
He replied, "The monk Gautama is shaving his head today, and everyone is bringing pastries. Please hurry and make some pastries, as I wish to accompany them and offer to the monk Gautama."

即作餅盛著器中，以淨巾覆上持去。
She then made pastries, placed them in a container, covered them with a clean cloth, and brought them.

爾時世尊大眾圍遶，國王、大臣、剎利、婆羅門、十八大聚落主，悉在會中。
At that time, the World-Honored One was surrounded by a great assembly, including kings, ministers, kshatriyas, Brahmins, and leaders of the eighteen major settlements, all present in the gathering.

此婆羅門疑懼不敢逆前，獨在一處作是念：「若沙門瞿曇一切智、一切見者，常觀世間無不見、無不知，若照世間我今亦是世間，亦應知見我心。」
The Brahmin, hesitant and fearful, dared not go forward and thought to himself, "If monk Gautama is all-knowing and all-seeing, always observing the world without missing anything, then, as I am also part of this world, he should also see and know my heart."

佛知婆羅門心念已，即遙喚婆羅門來。
The Buddha, knowing the Brahmin's thoughts, called the Brahmin to come from afar.

來已，佛知而故問：「婆羅門！汝器中何等？」
After he came, the Buddha knowingly asked, "Brahmin! What do you have in your container?"

答言：「是餅。世尊！」
He answered, "They are pastries, World-Honored One!"

佛語婆羅門：「行與眾僧，人人與一䊩。」
The Buddha told the Brahmin, "Go and distribute them to the assembly, giving each person one piece."

答言：「此大眾五百，今餅甚少，不能得遍。」
He replied, "There are five hundred people in this assembly, and there are too few pastries; it will not suffice."

佛言：「汝但行。」
The Buddha said, "Just go and distribute."

婆羅門即行餅，人與一䊩，餅故不減，乃至三遍猶故不減。
The Brahmin distributed the pastries, giving each person one piece, yet the pastries did not decrease, and even after three rounds, they still did not decrease.

時婆羅門作是念：「沙門瞿曇有大神力，如是少餅，大眾三遍，猶故不減。」
At that time, the Brahmin thought, "Monk Gautama has great magical powers; with so few pastries, to feed the assembly three times over, yet they still do not decrease."

佛知婆羅門心歡喜已，隨順說法示教利喜，婆羅門即得須陀洹道。
The Buddha, knowing the Brahmin's joy, then followed up by teaching the Dharma, giving instruction, benefit, and joy, and the Brahmin attained the path of Sotapanna.

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何婆羅門以少因緣得大果報？」
The monks asked the Buddha, "World-Honored One! How did the Brahmin attain great rewards from such a small cause?"

佛言：「不但今日以少因緣得大果報，過去世時已曾如是。如《本生經》中說。」
The Buddha replied, "Not only today, but also in past lives, one has gained great reward from a small cause, as stated in the Jataka tales."

餅者，大麥餅、𪍿麥餅、小麥餅、米餅、豆餅、油餅、酥餅、摩睺羅餅、鉢波勒餅、牛耳餅、波利斯餅、芻徒餅、曼坻羅餅、歡喜丸肉餅，如是比一切皆名餅。
Pastries include barley pastries, sorghum pastries, wheat pastries, rice pastries, bean pastries, oil pastries, ghee pastries, Mahura pastries, Pabhola pastries, cow ear pastries, Boris pastries, Chutu pastries, Mandala pastries, and joyful meatball pastries; all these are called pastries.

除肉餅、賓荼餅，餘一切餅，非別眾食、非處處食、非滿足食。
Except for meat pastries and Pinto pastries, all other pastries are not special food, not to be eaten everywhere, nor sufficient food.

是名餅法。
This is called the Way of Pastry.




菜法者，佛住南山頻頭大邑。
As to the method of cooking vegetables, the Buddha was residing in the southern mountains near the city of Pindola.

爾時有二優婆夷：一名娑婆居、二名叉波，能煮菜令如肉味，煮好菜已奉諸比丘。
At that time, there were two laywomen: one named Shapaju and the other named Chabo, who were able to cook vegetables to taste like meat, and they cooked good vegetables to offer to the monks.

比丘不受心生疑悔：「世尊制戒不得處處食，我等云何作淨得食？」
The monks did not accept it and felt doubtful and remorseful, thinking: "The World-Honored One prescribed rules against eating everywhere, how can we purify this food to eat?"

以上事具白世尊，佛言：「一切菜非處處食、非別眾食、非滿足食。」
All these matters were reported to the World-Honored One, who said: "All vegetables are not considered food that is eaten everywhere, not food for a separate assembly, and not food for being content."

菜者，乾菜、蕪菁菜、葱菜、瓠菜，如是比是名菜法。
Vegetables include dried vegetables, turnip greens, onion greens, and cucumber greens; this is what is named the method of cooking vegetables.




麨法者，
Concerning the laws of coarse flour,

大麥麨、
barley coarse flour,

小麥麨、
wheat coarse flour,

𪍿麥麨、
a type of millet coarse flour,

蒙具麨、
another type of flour,

磨沙麨、
pounded flour,

加羅那麨、
galan flour,

伊離麨、
ground flour,

胡麻麨、
sesame coarse flour,

如是比一切麨，
and similarly all other coarse flours,

非別眾食、
are not separate foods,

非處處食、
nor are they consumed everywhere,

非滿足食。
nor are they satisfying foods.

是名麨法。
This is called the law of coarse flour.




漿法者，佛住王舍城，爾時優伽梨居士作大施，

At that time, while the Buddha was residing in the city of Rajagaha, the householder Ugālī was making a great offering,

象馬奴婢各五百，種種雜施中有漿停久，諸比丘飲已醉悶，以是因緣具白世尊。

among various offerings, including five hundred elephants, horses, and servants each, there was some old alcoholic beverage that caused the monks to become intoxicated and muddled, and due to this matter, it was reported to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「從今日壞漿不聽飲。」

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, drinking ruined fermented beverages is not allowed."




復次佛住南山頻頭婆羅門聚落，爾時婆羅門聚落中婆羅門居士，節會日飲食相餉。  
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the village of Brahmins on Mount Pingdou, at that time the Brahmins in the village celebrated a festival with a feast.

爾時世尊時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入村乞食。  
At that time, the World-Honored One put on his robe and took his bowl to enter the village for alms.

時魔波旬作是念：「沙門瞿曇入聚落乞食，我當先往聚落惑彼人心使不與食。」  
Then Mara Papiyas thought, "The ascetic Gautama is entering the village for alms. I shall go first and confuse the villagers' minds so they won't give him food."

時世尊入聚落乞食遍無所得，空鉢而出到一樹下坐。  
The World-Honored One entered the village for alms but did not receive anything and left with an empty bowl to sit under a tree.

時魔波旬復作是念：「沙門瞿曇乞食遍無所得，我今當往擾亂其意。」  
Mara Papiyas then thought, "The ascetic Gautama received nothing in alms; now I shall go and disturb his mind."

即到佛所，在一面立作是言：「沙門瞿曇！可往聚落乞食，當令入村便得種種好食。」  
He went to the Buddha, stood at one side, and said, "Ascetic Gautama! You should go to the village for alms, and you will receive various good foods."

爾時世尊為波旬說偈言：  
At that time, the World-Honored One recited a verse for Mara Papiyas:



汝今失善利，  
You now lose good fortune,

以擾如來故，  
Because you disturbed the Tathagata,  




自得无量罪。  
Self-inflicted countless sins.

如来无苦事，  
The Tathagata has no suffering.




離一切煩惱，
Away from all troubles,

常得安樂住；
Always living in peace and happiness;




念法禪悅食，  
Contemplate the Dhamma, and be nourished by the joy of meditation.  

喻如光音天。」  
It is likened to the radiance of celestial beings.  



時魔波旬忽然不現。
The demon Mara suddenly disappeared.

其日世尊失食，諸比丘聞已，食者悔食、食半者止、未食者不食。
That day, the Blessed One lost his meal, and upon hearing this, the monks who had eaten regretted eating, those who were halfway stopped, and those who hadn't eaten did not eat.

時沙門婆羅門聞佛比丘僧失食，即持五百瓶石蜜奉獻世尊。
When the ascetic Brahmins heard that the Buddha and his monks lost their meal, they immediately brought 500 jars of rock honey to offer to the Blessed One.

佛語比丘：「以水作淨受取，病、不病比丘盡得食。」
The Buddha said to the monks: "Use water to purify and accept it, so that both sick and healthy monks can have food."




復次佛住梨耆闍河邊，時世尊鉢、比丘鉢共在露處，時有彌猴行見樹中有無蜂熟蜜來取世尊鉢，諸比丘遮。
Then the Buddha was staying near the Licchavi River, and when the World-Honored One and the monks had their alms bowls exposed, a monkey came by and saw ripened honey without bees in the tree, and approached with the Buddha's alms bowl, which the monks blocked.

佛言：「莫遮，此無惡意。」
The Buddha said, "Do not block it, it has no ill intentions."

彌猴便持鉢取蜜奉獻，世尊不受：「須待水淨。」
The monkey then took the bowl, collected the honey, and offered it, but the World-Honored One did not accept saying, "We must wait for water to purify."

彌猴不解佛意，謂呼有虫。
The monkey did not understand the Buddha's meaning, supposing there were insects.

轉看見鉢邊有流蜜，持到水邊洗鉢，水湔鉢中持還奉佛，佛即受取。
Then it saw honey dripping from the bowl’s edge, cleaned the bowl by a water source, and returned it to offer to the Buddha, who accepted it.

佛受已彌猴大歡喜，却行而舞墮坑命終。
Having accepted it, the monkey was greatly delighted, danced as it walked back, and fell into a pit, ending its life.

時諸比丘即說偈言：
At that time, the monks spoke verses saying:



十力世雄在榛林，
The mighty hero with ten strengths is in the thicket,

佛鉢僧鉢在露處，
The Buddha's alms bowl and the monk's alms bowl are in the open.



野兽殖德有情智，
The beast's moral intelligence is kind-hearted,

见好成熟无蜂蜜，
Seeing a ripe fruit without honey,



直前往取世尊鉢，
Went straight to get the World Honored One's bowl,

比丘欲遮佛不聽；
The monk wanted to stop him, but Buddha did not allow it;




得鉢盛蜜來獻佛，  
I received a bowl filled with honey to present to the Buddha.

如來慈愍為受之。  
The Tathagata compassionately accepted it.




心悦欢喜却行舞，  
Gladly dancing, filled with joy,  

脚跌坠坑而命终；  
But my foot slipped, and I met my end in a pit.  




即生三十三天上，  
Rebirth in the Trayastrimsha Heaven,

下生出家成羅漢。  
Descend to be ordained and attain Arhatship.




復次佛鴦求多羅國遊行，爾時雞尼耶螺髻梵志聞世尊來，辦種種漿待世尊。
Again the Buddha traveled to the kingdom of Anguttara, and at that time, the Brahmin Jinnaya heard of the Blessed One's arrival and prepared various drinks for him.

世尊至已，以種種漿奉佛及僧。
After the Blessed One arrived, various drinks were offered to the Buddha and the monks.

諸比丘心生疑：「世尊制戒，不得飲壞漿。我等云何得飲？」
The monks felt doubt in their hearts: "The Blessed One has established a precept that we should not drink spoiled beverages. How can we drink it?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks explained the matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「聽飲漿。」
The Buddha said, "You are permitted to drink the beverages."



漿者有十四種。

There are fourteen types of juice.

何等十四？

What are the fourteen?

一、名奄羅漿。

1. Called Amra Juice.

二、拘梨漿。

2. Jujube Juice.

三、安石榴漿。

3. Pomegranate Juice.

四、巔多漿。

4. Great Mountain Juice.

五、葡萄漿。

5. Grape Juice.

六、波樓沙漿。

6. Palasha Juice.

七、樓樓籌漿。

7. Loulou Ball Juice.

八、芭蕉果漿。

8. Plantain Fruit Juice.

九、罽伽提漿。

9. Kigati Juice.

十、劫頗羅漿。

10. Kepora Juice.

十一、波籠渠漿。

11. Balong Canal Juice.

十二、石蜜漿。

12. Stone Honey Juice.

十三、呵梨陀漿。

13. Harita Juice.

十四、佉披梨漿。

14. Khapira Juice.

是名十四種。

These are the fourteen kinds.

漿澄清一切聽飲，

Clear juice is permitted for drinking by all,

若變酒色、酒味、酒香，一切不聽飲。

If it takes on the color, taste, or scent of wine, it is prohibited for drinking by all.

若持漿來者應作淨，

If one brings juice, it should be purified,

若器底有殘水即名作淨；

If there is residual water at the bottom of the vessel, it is called purified;

若天雨墮中即名作淨；

If rain falls into it, it is called purified;

若洗器有殘水亦名為淨；

If washing the vessel leaves residual water, it is also called purified;

若車載石蜜被雨者即名為淨；

If stone honey carried by vehicle is rained upon, it is called purified;

若船載水湔即名作淨；

If a boat carrying water is washed, it is called purified;

若淨人洗手水湔亦名為淨。

If clean hands wash water, it is also called purified.

是名漿法。

This is called the juice method.




蘇毘羅者，佛憍薩羅國遊行，爾時尊者舍利弗風患動，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
In the land of Kausala, when the Buddha was traveling, Venerable Shariputra was troubled by the wind, and the monks reported this to the Blessed One.

佛言：「當須何藥治？」答言：「世尊！須蘇毘羅漿。」
The Buddha asked, "What medicine is needed?" They answered, "Blessed One! We need Suvira beverage."

佛言：「聽服。」
The Buddha said, "You are allowed to consume it."

佛告諸比丘：「待如來從憍薩羅國遊行還舍衛城語我，我當為諸弟子制蘇毘羅漿法。」
The Buddha told the monks, "When the Tathagata returns from Kausala to Shravasti, remind me, and I will prescribe the method for preparing Suvira beverage."

行還已，諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！先勅還舍衛城時當為諸比丘制蘇毘羅漿，今正是時。」
Upon returning, the monks told the Buddha, "Blessed One! You had previously instructed us to ask about preparing Suvira beverage when you returned to Shravasti, and now is the time."

佛告諸比丘：「作蘇毘羅漿法者，取𪍿麥輕擣，却芒塵土，勿令頭破，以水七遍淨淘置淨器中。」
The Buddha told the monks, "To make Suvira beverage, take barley, lightly crush it to remove the husk and dirt without breaking the grains, wash it seven times with clean water, and place it in a clean container."

臥蘇毘羅漿時，不得著東、不得著北，應著南邊、西邊開通風道，勿使臭氣來入，不得安著塔院中、不得著顯現處，應著屏處，以呵梨勒、鞞醯勒、阿摩勒、胡椒、蓽茇如是比盡壽藥等置中，以淨㲲覆之，以繩雞足繫，以木蓋上。
When fermenting the Suvira beverage, do not place it facing east or north. It should face south, with a ventilated passage on the west to prevent foul odors from entering. Do not place it in a stupa yard or in a conspicuous place; it should be in a secluded spot, covered with clean linen, and tied with a rope and a wooden lid on top.

受蘇毘羅漿時，隨漿多少以水中解然後飲。
When receiving Suvira beverage, dissolve it in as much water as needed and then drink.

若不與水解飲，越毘尼罪。
If it is drunk without dilution in water, it results in a Vinaya offense.

若麥頭不破，時、非時得飲。
If the barley grains are unbroken, it can be consumed at any time.

若麥頭破，時得飲、非時不得飲。
If the barley grains are broken, it can only be consumed at the appropriate time.

是名蘇毘羅漿法。
This is called the method for making Suvira beverage.



病药和上法、  
The prescription of medicine and higher practices,

阿阇梨共住、  
Living together with the acharya,




依止弟子法、
The rule of relying on disciples,

沙彌法鉢法、
The rules for novices and alms bowls,




粥法餅菜法、
Porridge and cake-making methods,

麨法眾漿法、
Flour and various sauce methods,




蘇毘羅漿法。
The method of Sura syrup.

第五跋渠竟。
The end of the fifth Bhadra.




佛住舍衛城，

When the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī,

爾時瞻波比丘同住不和更相諍訟，

at that time, the Jampa monks living together were in discord and quarreling with each other.

一比丘舉一比丘言：「我舉長老！」

One monk accused another and said, "I accuse the elder!"

二比丘舉二比丘、眾多比丘舉眾多比丘。

Two monks accused two monks, and many monks accused many monks.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊：

The monks, due to this reason, fully reported to the Blessed One:

「瞻波比丘非法生，云何一人舉一人、二人舉二人、眾多人舉眾多人？」

"The Jampa monks have arisen in unlawful conduct. How can one person accuse one person, two people accuse two people, and many people accuse many people?"

佛告諸比丘：

The Buddha said to the monks:

「有四羯磨。何等四？

"There are four types of legal procedures. What are these four?

有如法不和合羯磨、

There is a legal dissension procedure,

有如法和合羯磨、

a legal consensus procedure,

有非法和合羯磨、

an illegal consensus procedure,

有非法不和合羯磨。」

and an illegal dissension procedure.


孫陀羅難陀  
Sundara Nanda  

新染色  
Newly dyed  

此處舉餘處捨  
Take here, leave elsewhere  

開眼林  
Open Eye Forest  

外道出家  
Renouncing the world to follow an outside path  

共期  
Common goal  

空靜想  
Imagining emptiness and tranquility  

蘇河  
Suhe River  

善法講堂  
Hall of Good Dharma  

師子軍將  
Lion General  

男兒  
Boy  

離車童子  
Charioteer's son  

四凶鬪人  
Four fierce fighters  

閣上  
On the pavilion  

轉石  
Rolling stone  

溫泉  
Hot spring  

婬女  
Promiscuous woman  

三婆蹉  
Three witches  

索油  
Request oil  

迎食  
Greet for food  

看病  
Visit the sick  

鳥肉段  
Piece of bird meat  

賊肉段  
Piece of thief's meat  

猪肉段  
Piece of pork  

蹴女人  
Kick women  

磨麨  
Grind flour  

放犢  
Release the calf  

捨婦  
Abandon wife  

摩訶羅  
Maha Lara  

隔壁  
Next door  

布薩  
Bodhisattva  

二蘇毘羅漿  
Two Sugandha syrups  

塼  
Brick  

糞  
Feces  

乞食  
Beg for food  

欝詶  
Inner anticipation  



孫陀羅難陀者，佛住波羅柰城，爾時孫陀羅難陀在枳陀羅罽鉢精舍，初夜、後夜經行坐禪。
Then, during the Buddha's stay in Varanasi, Sundarananda was in the Jetavana Monastery, walking and meditating in the first and last watches of the night.

晨起結跏趺坐久，傾臥身露形起，眠不自覺。
In the morning, he sat in a cross-legged posture for a long time, then lay down and exposed himself without knowing, falling asleep.

時波羅柰城有婬女姊妹二人：一名加尸、二名半加尸。
At that time, in Varanasi, there were two prostitute sisters: one named Catterpillar, the other Half-Caterpillar.

夜出城外，於園林中共諸年少行愛欲法。
They went outside the city at night, indulging in sensual pleasures with young men in the gardens.

晨朝還入，因行過看，半加尸見比丘身生起，語姊言：「我欲共比丘行此欲事，姊小待我。」
Upon returning in the morning, as they passed, Half-Caterpillar saw the monk's body rise and said to her sister, "I want to engage in this desire with the monk; wait a moment for me."

答言：「此是阿羅漢，已除貪欲瞋恚愚癡，不樂此事。汝不聞釋家孫陀羅難陀，有好端正婦，棄捨出家耶？」
She replied, "This is an Arahant, free from greed, anger, and delusion, not delighting in such things. Haven't you heard that Sundarananda of the Shakya family, who had a beautiful and proper wife, renounced to become a monk?"

答言：「不爾，但待我。」即往就上作世俗法。
She answered, "No, just wait for me." She then proceeded to engage in worldly acts with him.

比丘即覺，以脚蹴墮，破傷五處：兩肘兩膝及額上。
The monk immediately awoke, kicked her off with his foot, injuring himself in five places: both elbows, both knees, and his forehead.

半加尸即起，抖擻衣土，往至姊所語姊言：「比丘見辱如是。」
Half-Caterpillar got up, dusted off her clothes, and went to her sister to say, "The monk insulted as such."

姊言：「我先不語汝耶？今復怨誰？」
The sister said, "Didn't I tell you first? Who do you resent now?"

比丘心生疑，以是因緣語諸比丘，諸比丘言：「汝犯波羅夷罪。」
The monk became doubtful, conveyed the incident to other monks, who said, "You have committed a Parajika offense."

答言：「我是阿羅漢，不受樂。」
He replied, "I am an Arahant, not clinging to pleasure."

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。佛言：「此比丘已除貪欲瞋恚愚癡，是阿羅漢，無罪。」
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One. The Buddha said, "This monk has removed greed, anger, and delusion, is an Arahant, and is without fault."

如是毘尼竟，是名孫陀羅難陀。
Thus concludes the Vinaya account, which is named Sundarananda.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The newly dyed one, the Buddha stayed in Śrāvastī city, explaining extensively as above.

爾時有比丘時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入舍衛城，次行乞食至一家，
At that time, a monk had just put on the village robe, holding an alms bowl, entered Śrāvastī city, and went begging for food to a house,

其家女人著新染色衣，坐不正故形體露現。
In that house, a woman wore newly dyed clothes, sitting improperly, thus revealing her body.

比丘見已欲心起即，語言：「姊妹太赤。」
The monk saw and immediately a desire arose, saying, "Sister, too red."

答言：「阿闍梨，此新染色。」
She replied, "Venerable, this is newly dyed."

是比丘心生疑，以是因緣具白世尊。
The monk's mind grew doubtful, due to these circumstances fully reported to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝以何心？」
The Buddha asked, "With what mind?"

答言：「欲心。」
Answered, "With desire."

佛言：「遣一比丘問彼女人解不？」
The Buddha said, "Send a monk to ask whether that woman understands?"

比丘即往問姊妹：「有比丘來到此中耶？」
The monk immediately went to ask the sister, "Did a monk come here?"

答言：「有。」
She replied, "Yes."

問言：「彼比丘說何等？」
Asked, "What did that monk say?"

答言：「我著新染衣坐，彼言：『大赤。』
She replied, "I was wearing newly dyed clothes, he said, 'Too red.'

我言：『如阿闍梨語，新染色故如是。』」
I said, 'As the Venerable said, because it is newly dyed.'"

時比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
At that time, the monk fully reported these circumstances to the Blessed One.

佛言：「解義不解味，偷蘭遮。
The Buddha said, "Understanding meaning but not taste, transgression (Saṅghādisesa).

解味不解義，偷蘭遮罪。
Understanding taste but not meaning, transgression offense.

解味解義，僧伽婆尸沙。
Understanding both taste and meaning, sangha offense.

不解義不解味，越毘尼罪。」
Not understanding meaning nor taste, violation offense."

如是比尼竟，是名新染衣色。
Thus, (this) monastic rule ends, this is called the color of newly dyed clothes.



餘處舉者，爾時有比丘一處住，僧與作舉羯磨已，至餘處僧中作如是言：「長老！我被舉，我今行隨順法，心柔軟，僧與我捨舉羯磨。」諸比丘即與作捨舉羯磨。
At that time, there was a monk living in one place, and after the community performed the suspension ceremony, he went to another community and said, "Elders! I have been suspended. Now, I follow the rule obediently with a soft heart. May the community lift the suspension from me." The monks then performed the ceremony to lift his suspension.

作捨舉羯磨已，問：「長老！汝為何事故被舉？」
After completing the suspension-lifting ceremony, they asked, "Elder! For what reason were you suspended?"

答言：「長老！僧已與我捨舉羯磨竟，復問我為？」
He replied, "Elders! The community has already lifted my suspension ceremony, why ask me again?"

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「如比丘語，僧與捨舉羯磨時應先問，若不問已捨，不應復問。
The Buddha said, "As the monk said, when the community conducts the lifting ceremony, they should ask first. If they have not asked before lifting, they should not ask again.

汝等云何餘處僧作舉羯磨此處僧捨？
How is it that another community performs the suspension ceremony, and this community lifts it?

若餘處僧作舉羯磨此處僧捨者，得越毘尼罪。
If another community performs the suspension ceremony and this community lifts it, it is a transgression of the Vinaya rules.

若比丘被舉，至餘處者應作是語：『長老！我被舉，行隨順法，心柔軟，為我捨。』
If a monk is suspended and goes to another place, he should say, 'Elders! I have been suspended, but I follow the rule obediently with a soft heart; please lift it for me.'

僧應問：『長老！汝以何事被舉？』
The community should ask, 'Elder! For what reason were you suspended?'

若言：『我無事被舉。』應語：『長老！汝無事被舉，我共汝法食味食。』
If he says, 'I was suspended for no reason,' they should say, 'Elder! If you were suspended for no reason, I will share food with you as per the rule.'

若言：『有事被舉。』僧應語：『長老！汝還彼處僧中捨去。』
If he says, 'I was suspended for a reason,' the community should say, 'Elder! You should return to that place to have it lifted.'

若彼處僧伽藍空、若無常、若罷道、若餘處去都無僧者，應問：『汝以何事被舉？』
If there are no monks at that location due to any reason, they should ask, 'For what reason were you suspended?'

若言：『我以是事被舉。』心柔軟見過，行隨順法已，應與捨。
If he says, 'I was suspended for this reason,' feeling remorse and having corrected his behavior, it should be lifted.

如是毘尼竟，是名餘處舉羯磨。
Thus concluded the Vinaya rule, this is called the suspension from another place ceremony.



開眼林者，爾時世尊未遮比丘尼阿練若處，

The "Forest of Open Eyes" refers to the time when the World Honored One had not yet restricted the practice for nuns in solitary places.

時大愛道瞿曇彌與五百比丘尼在開眼林中坐禪，

At that time, Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī and five hundred nuns were meditating in the Forest of Open Eyes.

盡是釋種女、摩羅女、離車女出家，女皆年少端正。

They were all daughters of the Śākya, Mallā, and Licchavī clans who had renounced the world, and they were all young and graceful.

初夜坐禪時有婬蕩年少來，

In the first part of the night while they were meditating, some lustful young men came.

欲侵逼諸比丘尼，比丘尼各以神足得脫。

They intended to molest the nuns, but the nuns, using their spiritual power, escaped.

如是中夜、後夜復還坐，年少復來。

In the middle and late parts of the night, they returned to meditate, and the young men came again.

若不眠利根者，復以神足而去；

For those with quick faculties who were not asleep, they once again used their spiritual power to leave.

若眠鈍根者，則為彼侵逼。

But those who were asleep or slow in faculties were molested by them.

心生疑，餘比丘尼語是比丘尼言：「汝等犯波羅夷。」

They became doubtful, and the other nuns said to them, "You have committed an offense leading to expulsion (Pārājika)."

答言：「我不受樂，如是我不知。」

They replied, "We have not indulged in pleasure; thus, we do not know."

諸比丘尼以是事語大愛道，

The nuns reported this matter to Mahāprajāpatī.

大愛道即以是因緣具白世尊。

And Mahāprajāpatī reported the whole incident to the World Honored One.

佛言：「是阿羅漢尼，已除貪欲瞋恚愚癡，不受欲樂，無罪。」

The Buddha said, "These nuns are Arhats, free from lust, hatred, and delusion, and they do not indulge in sensual pleasures; they are guiltless."

如是毘尼竟，是名開眼林。

Thus ends the Vinaya rule, which is known as the "Forest of Open Eyes".



，佛住迦維羅衛釋氏精舍。

The non-Buddhist ascetics, with the Buddha residing at the Shakya monastery in Kapilavastu.

爾時有比丘，時到著入聚落衣，入迦維羅衛城。

At that time, there was a bhikkhu who put on his village entry robes and entered the city of Kapilavastu.

時外道出家女，名字孫陀利，年少顏容端正著新染色衣，捉三掎杖，手執軍持在店肆前行。

A non-Buddhist ascetic woman, named Sundari, young and attractive, wearing newly dyed clothes, holding a triple-pronged staff, walked in front of the shop with a water pot in her hand.

比丘見已生欲心隨後而行，有一新產牸牛，以角觝比丘擲女人上。

The bhikkhu saw her and developed desire in his heart, followed her, and a newly calved cow gored the bhikkhu with its horn, tossing him onto the woman.

爾時比丘心生疑，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

At that moment, the bhikkhu's mind was filled with doubt, and other bhikkhus reported the incident to the Blessed One.

佛問比丘：「汝有何心？」答言：「欲心。」

The Buddha asked the bhikkhu, "What was in your mind?" He replied, "Desire."

復問比丘：「牛角舉時汝有何心？」答言：「恐怖心。」

The Buddha further asked the bhikkhu, "What was in your mind when the cow's horn lifted you?" He replied, "Fear."

佛言：「若欲心時無怖心、若怖心時無欲心。」

The Buddha said, "When there is desire, there is no fear; when there is fear, there is no desire."

佛言：「欲心隨女人後行，步步得越毘尼罪。」

The Buddha said, "With a mind of desire, following a woman, every step is a transgression of the Vinaya (monastic discipline)."

如是毘尼竟，是名外道出家。

Thus, the Vinaya is complete; this is called a non-Buddhist monastic practice


期者，佛住舍衛城，爾時有比丘，時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入舍衛城，次行乞食至一家。
At that time, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, and a monk, clothed for entering the settlement, carried his alms bowl into the city, going house to house for alms.

有一女人語比丘言：「作是事來。」
A woman said to the monk, "Come and do this thing."

答言：「我比丘法不得作是事。」
He replied, "According to the monastic rules, I cannot do this."

女人言：「若不作是事者，我當自傷破身，大喚言：『比丘強牽我行欲。』」
The woman said, "If you do not do this, I will harm myself and shout loudly that you forcibly led me into desire."

比丘答言：「須我到精舍已當還。」
The monk replied, "I must go to the monastery first, and then I will return."

女人言：「汝沙門釋子不妄語，要當來。」
The woman said, "You monks, sons of the Shakya, do not lie, you must come."

答言：「爾。」
He replied, "All right."

比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monk reported this matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「此是非法語，不應聽已聽，不應許已許，應將眾多比丘共往。」
The Buddha said, "This is unlawful speech, you should not listen nor consent to what should not be heard or allowed, you should go together with many monks."

即將眾多比丘往到已，如是言：「姊妹！我已來。」
Then, taking many monks with him, he went and said, "Sister! I have come."

女人言：「和南阿闍梨。」
The woman said, "Welcome, monk."

如是毘尼竟，是名共期。
Thus was the Vinaya recited, and this is called "agreement."



空靜想者，佛住舍衛城，爾時有比丘，獨坐樹下作空靜想，言：「我得阿羅漢。」

The practitioner of empty contemplation, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, there was a monk sitting alone under a tree practicing empty contemplation, saying, "I have attained Arhatship."

此比丘說是語時，餘比丘聞已作是言：「長老！汝不實，自稱得過人法，犯波羅夷罪。」

When this monk spoke these words, other monks heard and said, "Elder! You are not truthful, claiming to have attained superhuman qualities, you commit the Pārājika offense."

答言：「長老！我不自稱得過人法。我獨坐樹下作空靜想，言：『得阿羅漢耳。』」

He replied, "Elder! I did not claim to have attained superhuman qualities. I was merely sitting alone under a tree practicing empty contemplation, saying, 'I have attained Arhatship.'"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks with this reason went to report to the Blessed One.

佛問比丘：「汝實不得過人法而稱得過人法耶？」

The Buddha asked the monk, "Did you actually not attain superhuman qualities and claim to have attained them?"

比丘言：「世尊！我不自稱得過人法，我獨坐樹下作空靜想，言：『得阿羅漢。』」

The monk said, "Blessed One! I did not claim to have attained superhuman qualities, I was merely sitting alone under a tree practicing empty contemplation, saying, 'I have attained Arhatship.'"

佛言：「是空靜想稱過人法者，犯偷蘭罪。」

The Buddha said, "Claiming superhuman qualities in the state of empty contemplation constitutes the offense of Stealing (āpatti-sthūlātyaya)."

如是毘尼竟，是名空靜想。

Thus is the end of the Vinaya, known as the Empty Contemplation.



蘇河者，佛住毘舍離，爾時比丘僧集在一處。
At that time, the Buddha was residing in Vaishali, and the monks were gathered in one place.

爾時尊者大目連作如是言：「長老！我入無色定，聞蘇河邊龍象飲已抖擻耳聲。」
At that time, the Venerable Maha Moggallana said, "Elder! When I entered the formless meditation, I heard the sound of dragons and elephants drinking on the banks of the Suka River."

諸比丘言：「無有是處，入無色定過一切色想，云何聞聲？汝妄語不實，應作舉羯磨。」
The monks said, "That is impossible. In formless meditation, one transcends all sensory perceptions, so how can you hear a sound? You are speaking falsely and should be subjected to formal censure."

即集比丘僧。
The monks then gathered together.

佛乘神足從空中來，知而故問諸比丘：「汝作何等？」
The Buddha, using his spiritual powers, came from the sky and knowingly asked the monks, "What are you doing?"

諸比丘以上因緣具白世尊，乃至妄語不實作舉羯磨。
The monks explained everything to the Blessed One, including the accusation of falsehood and the proposal for censure.

佛告諸比丘：「目連實得無色定，不善知出入相，出定聞、非入定聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Moggallana has indeed attained formless meditation, but he does not clearly distinguish the entering and exiting of meditation. He heard the sound after exiting meditation, not during it."

佛語目連：「汝當應善分別知。」
The Buddha said to Moggallana, "You should learn to clearly distinguish this."

如是毘尼竟，是名蘇河。
Thus, the Vinaya conclusion is reached, and it is named the Sutra of Suka River.



講堂者，佛住舍衛城，爾時諸比丘集在一處，共作是論：「善法講堂柱拄梁不？」

At the time, when the Buddha was dwelling in the city of Savatthi, several monks gathered in one place and had a discussion: "Does the pillar of the Hall of Good Dharma support the beam?"

尊者目連言：「柱梁。」

Venerable Maudgalyayana said, "It supports."

有一無歲比丘言：「不拄。」

A young monk said, "It does not support."

「齊幾不柱？」

"What is the extent of the gap?"

「如毛許。」

"About the width of a hair."

即遣神足比丘往看，為柱不拄？

Then they sent a monk with supernormal powers to see if the pillar does not support the beam.

看已還來，言：「不拄。」

After observing, he returned and said, "It does not support."

「齊幾不拄？」

"What is the extent of the non-support?"

「如毛許不拄。」

"It does not support by about the width of a hair."

諸比丘語目連言：「不知拄不柱，何故言拄？汝妄語不實，應作舉羯磨。」

The monks said to Maudgalyayana: "You do not know if it supports, why did you say it does? You spoke falsely and should undergo a formal act of reproach."

即集僧作舉羯磨。

Immediately, they gathered the monks to perform a formal act of reproach.

佛乘神足從空而來，知而故問：「諸比丘汝作何等？」

The Buddha came from the sky with his supernormal powers and knowingly asked: "Monks, what are you doing?"

答言：「尊者大目連乃至不拄言拄，不實妄語，欲作舉羯磨。」

They answered, "Venerable Maudgalyayana said it supports when it does not. He spoke falsely, and we wish to perform a formal act of reproach."

佛問無歲比丘：「汝云何知不拄？」

The Buddha asked the young monk: "How do you know it does not support?"

答言：「世尊！我曾一時在善法講堂坐禪。」

The monk replied, "World Honored One! I once meditated in the Hall of Good Dharma."

佛語大目連：「汝何故不自看？汝應審實。」

The Buddha said to Maudgalyayana: "Why did you not see for yourself? You should ascertain the truth."

如是毘尼竟，是名善法講堂。

Thus concludes the Vinaya, which is called the Hall of Good Dharma.




，佛住毘舍离城，时阿闍世王与毘舍离离车有怨。
The Lion General, there was a time when the Buddha resided in Vaishali, and King Ajatashatru had enmity with the Licchavi of Vaishali.

时阿闍世王将四种兵欲伐离车，时毘舍离师子将军闻王贼欲至，即往尊者大目连所问言：「尊者！谁得胜？王得胜？我得胜？」
At that time, King Ajatashatru wanted to attack the Licchavi with his forces, and when the Lion General of Vaishali heard that the king's troops were coming, he went to the Venerable Mahamaudgalyayana and asked, "Venerable! Who will win? The king or us?"

答言：「王得胜。」问言：「有何瑞应？」答言：「我见二国非人共斗，王非人胜，王亦应胜。」
He answered, "The king will win." He further asked, "What good omen do you see?" He replied, "I see spirits from both countries fighting, and the king's spirit won; thus, the king should also win."

师子将军闻已，即便国中募得五百健儿，师子将军语诸人言：「我等宁作非丈夫而死，宁作丈夫入火坑而活？」
Upon hearing this, the Lion General immediately recruited five hundred strong men from the country and said to them, "Do we choose to die as non-heroes or to live as heroes in the fiery pit?"

诸人答言：「宁作丈夫而活，得济眷属。」
The men replied, "We choose to live as heroes and relieve our families."

时阿闍世王闻大目连语，宽闲不怖，徐徐顺恒水而上渡河。
When King Ajatashatru heard the words of Mahamaudgalyayana, he felt at ease and unafraid and slowly crossed the river upstream with the Ganges.

时师子将军奄其未阵，逆战大破。
At that time, the Lion General, not yet in formation, fought back vigorously.

时阿闍世王非济而渡危而得免，单马还国，即便嫌言：「坐是尊者大目连，倾吾国事。」
Then King Ajatashatru crossed without assistance, narrowly escaping danger, and returned alone, saying in displeasure, "This happened because of the words of Venerable Mahamaudgalyayana, which almost ruined my plans."

时毘舍离离车师子将军破军已，大欢喜作是语：「目连恐怖我，因此获大利。
After the Lion General of the Licchavi in Vaishali defeated the army, he joyfully said, "Mahamaudgalyayana frightened me, and thus I gained great benefit.

虽为不实语，蒙是虚诳恩。」
Though it was untrue, I am grateful for this deceitful favor."

时诸比丘闻阿闍世王瞋、离车复嫌，诸比丘言：「尊者大目连不知谁胜、谁不胜，而作妄语不实。」
When the monks heard about King Ajatashatru's anger and the Licchavi's complaints, they said, "Venerable Mahamaudgalyayana didn't know who would win or lose and spoke false words."

集比丘僧欲作举羯磨。
The assembly of monks wanted to proceed with a formal act of censure.

佛即乘神足来，知而故问：「比丘！汝等欲作何事？」
The Buddha then appeared through his divine power and deliberately asked, "Monks! What are you planning to do?"

答言：「世尊！大目连乃至妄语不实欲作举羯磨。」
They replied, "World-Honored One! Since Mahamaudgalyayana spoke false words, we intend to perform a formal act of censure."

佛语诸比丘：「目连见前不见后。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Mahamaudgalyayana saw the former but did not see the latter."

佛语目连：「汝应审谛。」 如是毘尼竟，是名师子将军。
The Buddha spoke to Mahamaudgalyayana: "You should be careful." Thus ended the Vinaya story, with this being the tale of the Lion General.


住舍衛城，

A man was residing in the city of Śrāvastī,

爾時大目連有知識檀越，

At that time, Mahāmoggallāna had a benefactor he knew,

家婦妊身，問：「阿闍梨！我生男？生女？」

When the housewife was pregnant, she asked, "Ācārya, will I bear a boy or a girl?"

答言：「生男。」

He answered, "A boy."

如是三重問，故言：「生男。」

She asked three times, so he said, "A boy."

後至產時生女，

When the time of birth came, she bore a girl,

時母人嫌言：「目連長夜作妄語，言生男而生女。

At that time, the mother disliked this, saying, "Moggallāna spoke a long night of lies, said it would be a boy, but it was a girl.

取悅人情而作是言。」

He said this to please others."

諸比丘聞已：「云何尊者大目連不善分別而作妄語？

The monks heard and said, "How could the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna not distinguish well and speak falsehoods?

應作舉羯磨。」

A formal act should be made."

即集比丘僧。

The monks then gathered.

佛乘神足來，知而故問：「比丘汝作何等？」

The Buddha, knowing this, came with his divine power and asked, "Monks, what are you doing?"

答言：「世尊！大目連乃至妄語不實，欲作舉羯磨。」

They replied, "World Honored One, Mahāmoggallāna spoke untruths, and we intend to perform a formal act."

佛言：「目連見前男兒，

The Buddha said, "Moggallāna saw the boy in front,

不見中間尼彌素夜叉須女家持男與、須男家持女與。」

but he did not see that the mid-night Nimī Yaksha exchanged the boy for a girl and the girl for a boy."

佛言：「汝去往語彼家：『世尊說言：「女是汝許、男是我許。」』」

The Buddha said, "You should go and tell that family: 'The World Honored One says, "The girl is yours, the boy is mine." '"

即便往交共相貿易。

Then they should go and exchange them.

如是毘尼竟，是名男兒。

Thus, the Vinaya was completed, and this is called a "boy."



離車童子者，佛住毘舍離，時到著入聚落衣，持鉢與眾多比丘入毘舍離城。
The Licchavi youth, when the Buddha resided in Vaishali, dressed in robes fit for entering a village, holding a bowl, and along with many monks entered the city of Vaishali.

爾時有離車童子在重閣上，與五百妓女共相娛樂。
At that time, there was a Licchavi youth on a multi-storied pavilion, enjoying himself with five hundred courtesans.

佛遙見而笑。
The Buddha saw this from afar and smiled.

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！有何因緣故笑？」
The monks asked the Buddha, "World-Honored One! What causes you to smile?"

佛言：「此人却後七日當命終入地獄。」
The Buddha said, "In seven days, this person will die and enter hell."

阿難白佛言：「頗有因緣得不入不？」
Ananda asked the Buddha, "Is there any condition under which he might not enter?"

佛言：「此人若於如來法中出家者得不入。」
The Buddha said, "If this person renounces the world within the Tathagata's teachings, he will not enter."

佛告阿難：「汝往教化此人勸令出家。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "Go and guide this person, advising him to renounce the world."

阿難即受佛教往勸，乃至出家已，佛告阿難：「汝語諸比丘，當守護此人，勿令犯戒使得重罪。」
Ananda immediately followed the Buddha's instruction and went to persuade him, until he renounced the world, and then the Buddha told Ananda, "You inform the monks to guard this person, so he doesn't break precepts and earn severe sin."

時諸比丘受教已，安此比丘置一房中，外封閉其戶。
The monks accepted the instruction and placed this monk in a room, sealing the door from the outside.

此比丘命盡，刀風解其形。
When this monk's life ended, a sharp wind dissected his form.

時諸比丘親里來，見其命終甚大悲惱。
At that time, the family of the monks came, and seeing his death, were deeply sorrowful and troubled.

佛為說偈言：
The Buddha explained with a verse:



若人百千歲，
If a person for a hundred or a thousand years,

供養百羅漢；
serves a hundred arhats;




不如一夜中，
Better in one night,

出家修梵行。
to renounce the world and practice Brahmacharya.



緣此之福祚，
Due to this blessing,

得離於六百；
One can escape from the six hundred;




六千六十歲，  
Six thousand and sixty years,

三塗之苦惱。」  
The suffering of the three realms.




時閉戶比丘心生疑悔，以是因緣具白世尊。
When the monk closed the door, he became doubtful and remorseful, so he reported the matter to the World Honored One.

佛問比丘：「汝以何心？」
The Buddha asked the monk, "With what intention did you do this?"

答言：「世尊！饒益心，恐彼犯戒得重罪故。」
He replied, "World Honored One, with a beneficial intention, fearing that he might break the precepts and incur severe punishment."

佛言：「封閉戶故，越毘尼罪。」
The Buddha said, "Because you closed the door, it is a transgression against the Vinaya."

如是毘尼竟，是名離車童子。
Thus the Vinaya was concluded, and this is known as the story of Licchavi, the lay disciple.



四人捨鬪者，佛住毘舍離，四人捨鬪欲出家，共入毘舍離。
The Buddha was residing in Vaishali when four people gave up fighting and wished to renounce the world; together they entered Vaishali.

城門中見本讎家，時守門人有弓杖，一人即捉弓、一人張弓、一人射而不死、一人射斷命根。
At the city gate, they saw an old enemy. The gatekeeper had a bow and staff; one grabbed the bow, another drew it, one shot but missed, and another shot and severed the root of life.

是中一人射死、一人射不死，是二人不應度出家，已出家者應驅出。
Among them, one killed with a shot, and another did not. These two should not be allowed to renounce the world; if they have already done so, they should be expelled.

是中一人捉弓、一人張弓，是二人不應度出家，已度出家者置，若後作惡時應驅出。
Among them, one grabbed the bow, another drew it; these two should not be allowed to renounce the world. If they have already renounced, they can stay, but if they misbehave later, they should be expelled.

如是惡人不應度出家，若度出家受具足者，得越毘尼罪。
Such evil people should not be allowed to renounce the world; if they have already taken full ordination, it constitutes a grave Vinaya offense.

是名四人捨鬪。
This is known as the case of the four people giving up fighting.



閣上者，佛住王舍城，爾時有一比丘得不淨觀，厭身故從閣上自投而下。
At that time, in Rajagaha, a monk attained impure contemplation and threw himself down from a pavilion out of aversion to the body.

時閣下有父子二人竹作，墮其父上，其父即死。
Below the pavilion, there were a father and son working with bamboo, and he fell on the father, who died immediately.

兒即牽比丘至王所，作是言：「是比丘殺我父。」
The son dragged the monk to the king and said, "This monk killed my father."

王問比丘：「尊者出家人，云何殺人？」
The king asked the monk, "Venerable, as a renunciant, how could you kill someone?"

答言：「大王！我自厭身，閣上投下墮彼父上，其實如是。」
The monk replied, "Great King! Out of self-aversion, I threw myself down from the pavilion and fell on his father; that's the truth."

王言：「放比丘去。」
The king said, "Release the monk."

其子稱怨：「大王！云何殺人而不問罪？」
The son complained, "Great King! How could you not punish someone who has killed?"

王善方便欲解喻其意：「汝去閣上，令比丘在下，汝便自投其上，殺彼比丘以報父讎。」
The king cleverly intended to illustrate his point: "You go up to the pavilion, and let the monk be below, then throw yourself to kill him and avenge your father."

其人自愛命重不能自投。
The man, valuing his own life too much, couldn't bring himself to jump.

時比丘心生疑悔，以是因緣具白世尊。
At that time, the monk felt doubt and regret, and for this reason, he fully disclosed everything to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝以何心？」
The Buddha asked, "What was your intention?"

答言：「世尊！以厭身故。」
He replied, "Blessed One! Out of aversion to the body."

佛言：「比丘！汝不看下自投，得越毘尼罪。」
The Buddha said, "Monk! Since you didn't look before you jumped, you have transcended the Vinaya offense."

如是毘尼竟，是名閣上。
Thus concludes the Vinaya case known as the Pavilion Case.



住王舍城，

The Turner of the Stone, the Buddha resided in Rajagriha,

爾時摩訶羅父子出家，共上耆闍崛山。

at that time, Mahala and his son left home and went up Vulture Peak Mountain together.

兒在前行，道中有石，

The son walked ahead, and there was a stone in the path,

作是念：「我當除道使淨，令婆路醯行無所礙安樂來上。」

and thought: "I should clear the path to make it clean, allowing Varuhi to walk unimpeded and joyfully ascend."

便轉石。

So he turned the stone.

石下磓殺摩訶羅。

The stone fell and killed Mahala.

其子懊惱，心生疑悔：「我作二不饒益事：殺人、殺父。」

His son was grief-stricken, and doubt and regret arose: "I did two harmful deeds: killing a person, killing my father."

以是因緣具白世尊。

He fully explained the cause and conditions to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝以何心？」

The Buddha asked: "With what intention did you act?"

答言：「世尊！我為父通道欲使得樂。」

He replied: "Blessed One, I wished to make the path clear for my father so he could find peace."

佛言：「道中轉石，得越毘尼罪。」

The Buddha said: "In the path turning the stone, you exceed the Vinaya offenses."

如是毘尼竟，是名轉石。

Thus, the Vinaya concludes, this is known as the turning of the stone. 




温泉者，佛住王舍城迦兰陀竹园，
The Buddha was residing in the Karanda bamboo grove in Rajagaha.

尔时有比丘入温泉中洗浴，
At that time, a monk entered the hot spring to bathe.

欲心起动身生触水失不净。
A lustful mind arose, causing impure bodily contact with the water.

心生疑悔，以是因缘具白世尊。
He became doubtful and remorseful, and conveyed this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝以何心？」
The Buddha asked, "With what mind did you act?"

答言：「世尊！欲心。」
He replied, "Blessed One, with a lustful mind."

佛言：「犯僧伽婆尸沙。」
The Buddha said, "That is a Sanghadisesa offense."

如是毗尼竟，是名温泉。
Thus concludes the vinaya section called "Hot Spring."



婬女者，佛住王舍城，爾時有比丘，時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入城次行乞食至一婬女家。
Once upon a time, the Buddha was staying in the city of Rajagaha. At that time a monk, having put on his robes and taken his bowl, entered the city for alms and came to a prostitute's house.

婬女言：「比丘共作是事來。」
The prostitute said, "Monk, come and do this thing with me."

比丘言：「世尊制戒不得行。」
The monk replied, "The Blessed One has prohibited this practice."

婬女言：「我知世尊制戒不得行婬，汝但來，內作外棄。」
The prostitute said, "I know the Blessed One has prohibited sexual conduct, but you just come here and do it internally while appearing externally restrained."

比丘即共行欲已，心生疑悔，以是因緣具白世尊。
The monk then engaged in the act and afterward felt doubt and remorse, and he reported the incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「內作外棄、外作內棄、內作內棄，若入一節，乃至如胡麻，犯波羅夷罪。」
The Buddha said, "Whether internally acting while appearing externally restrained, externally acting while appearing internally restrained, or internally also, if any act is entered even by a speck as small as a sesame seed, it constitutes a Pārājika offense."

如是毘尼竟，是名婬女。
Thus ends the Vinaya section, and this is the story of the prostitute.




三婆蹉者，佛住王舍城，

At one time, the Buddha was residing in the city of Rājagṛha,

爾時尊者畢陵伽婆蹉在聚落中住，

At that time, the Venerable Piṇḍolabhāradvāja was staying in a village,

時到著衣持鉢次行乞食，

When the time came, he donned his robe, took his alms bowl, and went to beg for food,

得食已至一放牧家食。

Having obtained food, he went to eat at a herdsman's home.

其家女到尊者邊立啼，

The girl of that house came to the venerable one and stood weeping,

即問女言：「何故啼？」

And he asked her, "Why are you crying?"

答言：「阿闍梨，今是節會日，

She replied, "Venerable sir, today is a festival day,

諸人集戲，我無衣裳獨不得往，那得不啼？」

People are gathered for the festivities, but I have no clothes, so I can't go. How can I not cry?"

時尊者即化作種種衣服、珠寶、瓔珞、金銀校飾，與已便去。

The venerable one then magically created various clothes, jewels, necklaces, and ornaments of gold and silver and gave them to her, then left.

乃至王聞，聞已即喚女問：「汝何處得此好瓔珞？」

Eventually, the king heard, and upon hearing, he summoned the girl and asked, "Where did you get these fine ornaments?"

答言：「尊者畢陵伽婆蹉見與。」

She replied, "The Venerable Piṇḍolabhāradvāja gave them to me."

王即喚比丘來問：「尊者何處得此好金？非世所有。」

The king then summoned the bhikṣu and asked, "Venerable, where did you get this fine gold? It is not of this world."

比丘即捉杖打壁打床，一切化成金，

The bhikṣu then struck the wall and the bed with his staff, and they all transformed into gold,

作如是言：「首陀羅何處得金？此即是也。」

Saying, "Where would the Śūdra get gold? This is it."

王言：「阿闍梨有大神足，還去；放牧牛女還家。」

The king said, "The venerable has great miraculous powers; you may leave. Let the herdsman's daughter return home."

諸比丘聞已，見畢陵伽婆蹉現異，

When the monks heard this and saw the miraculous display by Piṇḍolabhāradvāja,

乃至放牧女被執，應作舉羯磨，即集比丘僧。

As the herdsman's daughter was detained, they intended to perform a disciplinary act and gathered the assembly of monks.

世尊乘神足來，知而故問：「汝作何等？」

The World-Honored One came by his divine power, and knowing, asked, "What are you doing?"

答言：「世尊！畢陵伽婆蹉現異，乃至放牛女被執。」

They replied, "World-Honored One! Piṇḍolabhāradvāja displayed a miracle, and thus the herdsman's daughter was detained."

佛問畢陵伽婆蹉：「汝實現異令牧牛女被執耶？」

The Buddha asked Piṇḍolabhāradvāja, "Did you truly display a miracle causing the herdsman's daughter to be detained?"

答言：「世尊！我不故現異令牧牛女被執，我慈心故耳！」

He replied, "World-Honored One! I did not intentionally display a miracle to have the herdsman's daughter detained; it was out of compassion!"

佛言：「畢陵伽婆蹉大神足故，無罪。」

The Buddha said, "Because of Piṇḍolabhāradvāja's great miraculous power, there is no fault."

如是毘尼竟。

Thus, the Vinaya concludes here.



復次尊者畢陵伽婆蹉在聚落中住，自泥房舍。
Furthermore, the venerable Pilindavatsa was residing in a village, building his own hut with mud.

時瓶沙王來，見尊者自泥治房舍，問：「阿闍梨！作何等？」
Then King Bimbisara came, saw the venerable building his hut with mud, and asked, "Venerable sir, what are you doing?"

答言：「首陀羅，泥治房舍。」
He replied, "I'm a Śūdra, building a hut with mud."

王言：「阿闍梨！無人使耶？我當與園民。」
The king said, "Venerable sir, do you have no attendants? I can provide you with gardeners."

答言：「不須。首陀羅。」
He replied, "No need. I'm a Śūdra."

如是至三，猶故不受。
He refused three times, yet still did not accept.

聚落中人聞已，來到其所，求言：「阿闍梨！願取我等作園民，我當供給。」
The villagers, having heard this, came to him, saying, "Venerable sir, please accept us as gardeners; we will serve you."

比丘言：「汝等一切能持五戒者，我當取汝。」
The monk said, "If you all can uphold the Five Precepts, I will accept you."

答言：「能。」
They replied, "We can."

取已，盡受五戒奉齋修德，聚落殷富遂致外賊來劫，抄掠婦女及財物。
Having accepted them, they took the Five Precepts, observed fasts, and cultivated virtue, leading the prosperous village to attract outside bandits who raided and plundered the women and property.

聚落中人往告師言：「阿闍梨！賊來劫我兒女錢財，即日蕩盡。」
The villagers went to tell the teacher, "Venerable sir, bandits have come and plundered our children and wealth; everything is gone in a day."

尊者畢陵伽婆蹉入慈心定，見賊驅去，比丘語賊言：「首陀羅！汝何故劫我園民？」
The venerable Pilindavatsa entered a meditative state of loving-kindness, saw the bandits being driven away, and said to them, "Śūdra! Why do you rob my gardeners?"

即化作大坑，使園民在此岸、賊在彼岸，語言：「首陀羅汝去。」
He then magically created a large pit, placing the gardeners on one side and the bandits on the other, and said, "Śūdras, you leave."

諸比丘聞已作如是言：「畢陵伽婆蹉賊復劫賊，應作舉羯磨。」
Having heard this, the monks said, "Pilindavatsa is robbing the robbers; a formal act of censure should be performed."

即集比丘僧，檢校此事。
They immediately convened the assembly of monks to investigate this matter.

時世尊乘神足來，知而故問：「汝作何等？」
At that time, the Blessed One used his divine power to come there and knowingly asked, "What are you doing?"

答言：「世尊！畢陵伽婆蹉賊復劫賊，欲作舉羯磨。」
They replied, "Blessed One! Pilindavatsa is robbing the robbers, and we intend to perform a formal act of censure."

佛問畢陵伽婆蹉：「汝實爾不？」
The Buddha asked Pilindavatsa, "Is this true?"

答言：「世尊！我不賊復劫賊，但聚落人民啼來告我，我慈心故！」
He replied, "Blessed One! I did not rob the robbers, but the villagers came to me in tears, and out of compassion, I did what I did!"

佛言：「是大神足，無罪。」
The Buddha said, "This is a great miracle, not a crime."

如是毘尼竟。
Thus, the Vinaya concludes.



摩訶僧祇律卷第二十九  
Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume 29  




