我们一起站在山顶。

We stand together at the mountain top.

微风轻轻拂过我们的脸庞。

The breeze gently brushes against our faces.

眼前的风景令人心旷神怡。

The scenery before us is breathtaking.

阳光洒在大地上，温暖而明亮。

The sunlight spills across the land, warm and bright.

我们都感到无比的自由和快乐。

We feel incredibly free and joyful.

在这一刻，时间仿佛停止。

In this moment, time seems to stand still.




【經文資訊】

[Scripture Information]

大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律

Taisho Revised Tripitaka, Volume 22, No. 1425, Mahasanghika Vinaya




#【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

#【Version History】Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯  
[Editing Instructions] This database was edited by the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation (CBETA) based on the "Taisho Revised Tripitaka."  




蕭鎮國大德提供

Provided by Virtuous Elder Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain virtuous elder in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchan, with new punctuation



【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，

[Other Notices] This database can be freely circulated at no cost,

詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

Please refer to the [Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Notice] for details.




orry, I cannot assist with this request as it includes translating verbatim text


摩诃僧祇律卷第七  
Maha Sanghika Vinaya Scroll Seven  




東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translated by the Indian Buddhist monk Buddhabhadra and Faxian from the Eastern Jin Dynasty




明僧殘戒之餘  
The remaining precepts of the enlightened monk  




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

時尊者陀驃摩羅子，眾僧拜典知九事，如上說。
At that time, the Venerable Devadatta was managing the monks and was knowledgeable in nine matters, as previously mentioned.

乃至六群比丘，受得下房麁食，心常愁苦，乃至念言：「是長老陀驃摩羅子久在梵行者，我等常得苦惱。
As for the six groups of monks, they received only minimal food and shelter and were often troubled, thinking, "The Elder Devadatta has been practicing the holy life for a long time, while we constantly face distress.

又世尊制戒，不聽以無根波羅夷法謗，今當求其罪過根原。」
Moreover, the World-Honored One established precepts, not allowing baseless accusations of Parajika offenses, and now we should seek the root and origin of his faults."

作是語已，常隨逐尊者陀驃摩羅子，若行、若住、若坐、若臥，常隨左右至月八日、十四日、十五日。
After saying this, they constantly followed Venerable Devadatta, whether he was walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, always close by on the eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days of the month.

諸比丘尼來禮佛足，是時尊者陀驃摩羅子去佛不遠，於一面坐。
When the nuns came to pay respect to the Buddha's feet, Venerable Devadatta was sitting not far away on one side.

諸比丘尼禮佛足已，次來禮尊者陀驃摩羅子。
After the nuns paid respect to the Buddha's feet, they then came to pay respect to Venerable Devadatta.

陀驃摩羅子時有姊妹比丘尼，禮拜時風吹衣角，墮陀驃摩羅子膝上，即以手舉去。
At that time, a nun who was the sister of Devadatta bowed, and the wind blew her robe, which fell onto Devadatta's knee, and he lifted it with his hand.

時六群比丘便作是言：「長老陀驃汝犯波羅夷。」
Then the six groups of monks said, "Elder Devadatta, you have committed a Parajika offense."

陀驃言：「我無是事。」
Devadatta said, "I did not do such a thing."

六群比丘復言：「我已見事，何所復疑？誰復作賊，自言是賊。」
The six groups of monks replied, "We have already seen the matter, what more is there to doubt? Who commits theft and then admits to being a thief?"

便於屏處及多人中，乃至僧中說是事。
Then, in private and in the midst of many people, even among the sangha, they spoke of this matter.

爾時陀驃以是因緣，具白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
At that time, Devadatta fully informed the World-Honored One of this matter, and the Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

即便呼來。佛問六群比丘：「汝實以無根波羅夷謗陀驃摩羅子耶？」
They were called forth. The Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Did you falsely accuse Devadatta of a baseless Parajika offense?"

答言：「不也。世尊！實有根本。」
They answered, "No, World-Honored One! There was indeed a basis."

佛言：「有何根本？」
The Buddha asked, "What is the basis?"

六群比丘白佛言：「時一齋日有諸比丘尼來禮世尊，次禮長老陀驃。爾時風吹尼衣，拂陀驃膝上。爾時陀驃手捉彼衣，是為根本。」
The six groups of monks told the Buddha, "On a fasting day, some nuns came to pay respect to the World-Honored One and then to Elder Devadatta. At that time, the wind blew a nun's robe onto Devadatta's knee, and he caught it with his hand, which is the basis."

佛言：「癡人！此非波羅夷根本，此是異分中小小事。」
The Buddha said, "Foolish people! This is not the basis for a Parajika offense. It is a minor matter among the various concerns."

佛語六群比丘：「汝常不聞，世尊種種因緣，於梵行人所起恭敬心、慈身口意耶？
The Buddha said to the six groups of monks, "Have you not always heard that the World-Honored One, for various reasons, arises a sense of respect and a loving mind, speech, and intention towards those practicing the holy life?

汝今云何於清淨無罪比丘，欲破彼淨行故，以異分中小小事非波羅夷比丘，以波羅夷法謗？
How can you now, towards a pure and innocent monk, seek to destroy his pure conduct, using a minor non-Parajika matter to make a Parajika accusation?

此非法、非律、非是佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not the Dharma, not the Vinaya, not the Buddha's teaching, and it cannot be used to cultivate good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All the monks residing in Shravasti should gather. For the benefit of ten reasons, I will establish precepts for the monks, and those who have already heard should hear again.

若比丘瞋恨不喜故，以異分中小小事非波羅夷比丘，以波羅夷法謗，欲破彼梵行。
If a monk, out of anger and displeasure, uses a minor non-Parajika matter to make a Parajika accusation against a monk, wishing to destroy his holy life,

彼於後時，若撿挍、若不撿挍，以異分中小小事，是比丘住瞋恨故說，僧伽婆尸沙。」
then later, whether he examines or not, for minor matters among the various concerns, because the monk harbors anger, it is considered a Sanghadisesa offense.



比丘瞋恨不喜者，如上說。
The monk who is angry and displeased is as stated above.




異分者，除四波羅夷、十三僧伽婆尸沙，

Exception refers to the four Parajikas and the thirteen Sanghadisesas,

是為異分小小事者，眾學法及威儀也。

These are considered minor issues, which are the learning rules and etiquette.



非波羅夷比丘，以波羅夷法謗者，四波羅夷中，若一一事謗者

A non-Parajika monk who slanders using the Parajika law, among the four Parajikas, if he slanders one by one

無事說過欲破彼梵行者，欲令彼非比丘非沙門、非釋種子

without reason criticizes to destroy his noble conduct, wishing him to be neither a monk nor a recluse, not of the Shakya lineage

欲令作沙彌、作俗人、作園民、作外道。

wants him to become a novice monk, a lay person, a gardener, or an outsider.



後時若撿挍、若不撿挍。

Later on, there may be examination or no examination.

撿挍者，「汝見何事？婬耶？盜耶？故殺人耶？

Examination refers to asking, "What did you see? Adultery? Theft? Murder?

不實稱過人法耶？云何見？何因緣見？

False accusation? How did you see it? What cause made you see it?

何處見？」是名為撿挍。

Where did you see it?" This is called examination.

若不如是問者，是名不撿挍。

If one does not ask like this, it is called no examination.




清净无罪比丘，以异分中小小事，住瞋恨故说者，僧伽婆尸沙。
Monks who are pure and free of guilt, if because of small matters within differing groups, harbor resentment, it is the offense of Pārājika.




僧伽婆尸沙者，如上說。  
Saṅghāvaśeṣa, as mentioned above.




若比丘瞋恨，謗二相似者：淨、不淨。
If a monk is angry and criticizes two similar things: pure and impure.

清淨者言：「見我犯何罪？」
The one who is pure says, "What crime do you see me commit?"

一切如上無根中說，乃至謗俗人，越比尼心悔。
All as stated above, without foundation, even slandering laypeople, exceeding the mind's repentance.

是故說：「若比丘瞋恨不喜故，以異分中小小事，乃至住瞋恨故說，僧伽婆尸沙。」
Therefore it is said: "If a monk is angry and displeased, over trivial matters in different sections, and speaks while remaining angry, it is an offense entailing expiation."



佛住王舍城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in Rajagriha, explaining as mentioned above.

是時提婆達多欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，
At that time, Devadatta sought to break the harmony of the Sangha, diligently holding to the task of schism.

於十二修多羅、戒序、四波羅夷、十三僧伽婆尸沙、
In the twelve sutras, precepts, four major transgressions, and thirteen Sanghadisesas,

二不定法、三十尼薩耆波夜提、九十二波夜提、
two indefinite rules, thirty Nissagiya Pacittiya, ninety-two Pacittiya,

四波羅提提舍尼、眾學法、七滅諍法、隨順法，
four Patidesaniya, numerous training rules, seven rules for resolving disputes, and supplementary rules,

不制者制、已制者便開，
He prohibited what was unprohibited and allowed what was prohibited,

乃至在家出家共行法，所謂九部經：
even to the extent of mixing lay and monastic practices, preaching the nine divisions of scripture:

修多羅、祇夜、授記、伽陀、優陀那、如是語經、
the sutras, geya, vyakarana, gathas, udana, itivrittaka,

本生經、方廣、未曾有法，
jataka, vaipulya, and adbhuta-dharma.

於此九部經更作異句、異字、異味、異義，
In these nine sections of scriptures, he altered the sentences, words, meanings, and interpretations,

各各異文辭說，自誦習持亦教他誦持。
differently expressing each part, reciting and practicing them himself, and teaching others.

時諸比丘語提婆達多：「汝莫作方便壞和合僧，
The bhikkhus then spoke to Devadatta: "Do not make efforts to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha,

莫執持破僧事，汝莫為破和合僧故勤方便，
do not adhere to the task of schism, do not diligently engage in efforts to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha,

莫受破僧事故共諍。長老當與僧同事。
and do not cause disputes over the schism. The elder should work together with the Sangha.

何以故？僧和合歡喜不諍，共一學如水乳合，
Why? A harmonious Sangha is joyful and free of disputes, united in learning like milk in water,

如法說法照明安樂住。」
expounding Dharma and dwelling in clarity and peace."

如是一諫不止，第二、第三諫亦復不止。
Though warned once, he did not stop; after a second and third warning, he still did not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白佛言：
The bhikkhus, due to these events, went to the Buddha and said:

「世尊！提婆達多欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，
"Bhagavan, Devadatta seeks to break the harmony of the Sangha, diligently engaging in the task of schism,

從戒序乃至九部法，異句、異字、異味、異義，
altering the sentences, words, meanings, and interpretations of scriptures from precepts to the nine sections of Dharma,

各各異文辭說，自誦習亦教他。
expressing each of them differently, reciting and practicing, also teaching others.

時諸比丘一諫不止，二諫、三諫猶故不止。」
After the bhikkhus warned him once, twice, and thrice, he still did not stop."

佛告諸比丘：「若是提婆達多愚癡人！
The Buddha told the bhikkhus, "If Devadatta is indeed a foolish person!

欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，
One who diligently engages in the task of schism to break the harmony of the Sangha,

乃至九部法作異句、異字、異味、異義，
altering sentences, words, meanings, and interpretations of the nine sections of Dharma,

各各異文辭說。三諫不止者，
expressing each of them differently. If, after being warned three times,

汝去應當屏處三諫，多人中三諫。
he does not desist, you should go privately to warn him three times, and warn him again in a group of people.

僧中三諫，令捨是事。」
Warn him three times among the Sangha, making him abandon these actions."

比丘屏處諫者，應作是說：
When the bhikkhus privately admonish, they should say:

「汝提婆達多！實欲破和合僧執持破僧事，
"Devadatta, do you genuinely intend to destroy the harmony of the Sangha, engaging in schismatic activities,

乃至九部法，異句、異字、異味、異義，
altering the sentences, words, meanings, and interpretations of the nine sections of Dharma,

異文辭說，自誦習亦復教他不？」
differently expressing them, reciting and also teaching others?"

答言：「實爾。」復應語提婆達多：
If he responds, "Indeed," they should further say to Devadatta:

「汝莫破和合僧故勤方便，莫執持破僧事。
"Do not diligently engage in efforts to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha; do not adhere to schismatic activities.

長老提婆達多！破和合僧最是大惡重罪，
Elder Devadatta, destroying the harmony of the Sangha is a great evil and serious offense,

當墮惡道入泥犁中，經劫受罪。
leading to rebirth in evil paths, suffering for eons.

提婆達多！我今慈心饒益故，當受我語。
Devadatta, out of compassion and benefit, please heed my words.

一諫已過二諫在，捨此事不？」
After one warning, a second follows; will you give up these actions?"

不捨者，第二、第三諫亦如是。
If he does not relent, the second and third warnings should be in the same manner.

復於多人中三諫亦如是。
Warn him similarly three times in a group.

猶不止者，將詣僧中應作求聽羯磨。
If he still does not stop, he should be brought to the Sangha for a formal act of determination.

羯磨者作如是說：
In the act of determination, the following should be said:

「大德僧聽！是長老提婆達多欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事住，
"Noble Sangha, listen! This elder Devadatta wishes to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha, diligently engaging in schismatic activities,

於十二事，乃至九部經，異句、異字、異味、異義，
altering the twelve teachings and the nine sections of the canon in sentences, words, meanings, and intentions,

異文辭說，自誦亦教他。
expressing them differently, reciting and teaching others.

已屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。
Having admonished him privately and among many, he still does not stop.

若僧時到，僧今於僧中當三諫令止。」
If the time of assembly is reached, the Sangha should admonish him three times to stop."

僧中應問提婆達多：「汝實於十二法，
In the Sangha assembly, Devadatta should be asked, "Is it true that in the twelve teachings,

乃至九部經，異句、異字、異味、異義，
and even in the nine sections of the canon, you alter sentences, words, meanings, and intentions,

異文辭說，自誦復持教他。
expressing them differently, reciting and instructing others?

諸比丘已屏處三諫、多人中三諫，
After the bhikkhus admonished you privately and in a group of people,

猶故不止耶？」答言：「實爾。」
And you still did not stop?" If he answers, "Indeed,"

僧中應諫言：「汝提婆達多！
The Sangha should admonish, "Devadatta,

莫為破和合僧故勤方便莫執持破僧事，
Do not engage in efforts to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha; do not adhere to schismatic activities,

乃至於九部經中，異句、異字、異味、異義，
even in the nine sections of the canon, altering sentences, words, meanings, and intentions.

異文辭說。汝莫破和合僧，
Differently expressing them. Do not break the harmony of the Sangha;

破和合僧者是大惡事，是重罪墮惡道入泥犁中，
those who disrupt the harmony of the Sangha commit a great evil, a heavy sin leading to rebirth in evil paths,

經劫受罪。今日眾僧中慈心諫汝，
suffering for eons. Today, in the midst of the Sangha, we compassionately admonish you,

欲饒益故，當受僧語。
for your benefit; heed the words of the Sangha.

一諫已過二諫在，當捨此事。」
After one warning, a second follows; you should give up these actions."

若不捨，如是第二、第三諫猶故不止。
If he does not relent, repeat the second and third admonitions in the same manner.

諸比丘復以是事，往白世尊：
The bhikkhus then reported this matter to the Blessed One:

「是提婆達多已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫，
"Devadatta has been admonished three times privately, three times in a group, and three times in the Sangha,

此事猶故不捨。」
yet he still has not abandoned this conduct."

佛語諸比丘：「是提婆達多癡人！
The Buddha said to the bhikkhus, "Devadatta is a foolish person!

破和合僧勤方便執持破僧事，
Who diligently engages in efforts to disrupt the harmony of the Sangha,

已屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫，
Having admonished privately, in a group, and in the Sangha assembly,

此事猶故不捨者，僧應與作舉羯磨。」
he still has not abandoned these actions; the Sangha should proceed with a formal act of determination."




諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是提婆達多不受諸比丘諫，自受苦惱。」
The monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! How is it that Devadatta did not accept the monks' advice and suffered himself?"

佛告諸比丘：「不但今日不信他語自受苦惱，過去世時已曾如是。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Not only today did he not trust others and suffer, but this was also the case in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」
The monks said to the Buddha, "Has this happened before?"

佛言：「如是。過去世時有城，名波羅奈，國名伽尸。」
The Buddha said, "Yes. In a past life, there was a city called Varanasi, in the country named Kashi."

時有一婆羅門，於曠野中造立義井，為放牧取薪草人行來者，皆就井飲并洗浴。
At that time, there was a Brahmin who made a public well in the wilderness for herders and wood gatherers to drink from and bathe.

時日向暮有群野干，來趣井飲地殘水。
In the evening, a pack of jackals would come to the well to drink the leftover water.

有野干主，不飲地水，便內頭罐中飲水。
A leader among the jackals would not drink the ground water but would drink the water from the jar.

飲水已戴罐高舉，撲破瓦罐，罐口猶貫其項。
After drinking, it would lift the jar high and smash it, leaving the jar's neck around its head.

諸野干輩語主野干：『若濕樹葉可用者，常當護之，況復此罐利益行人。』
The other jackals said to the leader, "If wet leaves could be useful, you would always protect them, let alone this jar which is beneficial to travelers."

野干主言：『我作是事樂，但當快心，那知他事？』
The leader jackal said, "I do this for fun, simply to please myself, what do I care about other things?"

時行人語婆羅門：『汝井上罐已破。』
At that time, passersby told the Brahmin, "Your jar at the well is broken."

復更著之，猶如前法，為野干所破；如是非一，乃至破十四罐。
He replaced it multiple times, but like the first, it was broken by the jackal; this continued until fourteen jars were broken.

諸野干輩數數諫之，猶不受語。
The other jackals frequently advised it, but still, it did not listen.

時婆羅門便自念言：『是誰於我福德義井作障礙者，今當往觀。』
Then the Brahmin thought, "Who is hindering my virtuous public well? I should go observe."

知其所以，即持罐往著井上，於屏處微伺見之。
Knowing the reason, he placed another jar at the well and watched from a hidden place.

諸行人飲水而去，無破罐者。
The passersby drank the water and left, without breaking the jar.

至日向暮，見群野干來飲地殘水，唯野干主，飲罐中水，然後撲破。
By evening, he saw the pack of jackals come to drink the remaining water, and the leader drank from the jar before smashing it.

見已便作是念：『正是野干於我福德井而作留難。』
Seeing this, he thought, "It is the jackal causing trouble at my virtuous well."

便作木罐堅固難破，令入頭易出頭難，持著井邊，捉杖屏處伺之。
So he made a strong wooden jar that was difficult to break, easy to enter but hard to remove, and placed it by the well, holding a stick to watch from a hidden place.

行人飲訖，向暮野干群集，如前飲地殘水，唯野干主飲罐中水訖，便撲地不能令破。
After the passersby drank, the pack of jackals gathered in the evening, like before, drinking the remaining water from the ground, and only the leader drank from the jar but could not break it on the ground.

時婆羅門捉杖來出打殺野干。
The Brahmin then came out with the stick and killed the jackal.

時空中有天，說此偈言：
At that time, a deity in the sky spoke this verse:



知識慈心語，  
A wise person speaks with kindness,

佷㑦不受諫；  
A stubborn person does not accept advice.




守頑招此禍，  
Stubbornness invites this disaster,  

自喪其身命；  
Resulting in losing one's own life;  




是故癡野干，

Thus the foolish jackal,

遭斯木罐苦。

suffers the misery of the wooden pot.




佛告諸比丘：「爾時野干主者，今提婆達多是。
The Buddha told the monks: "At that time, the leader of the jackals was Devadatta now. 

時群野干者，今諸比丘諫提婆達多者是。
The group of jackals at that time are now the monks advising Devadatta. 

比丘當知，於過去時已曾不受知識軟語，自喪身命。
Monks should know that in the past, he did not accept wise soft words and lost his life. 

今復不受諸比丘諫，當墮惡道長夜受苦。」
Now he does not accept the advice of the monks and will fall into the evil path, suffering long nights."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "All the monks residing in the city of Sravasti should gather, and for ten benefits establish precepts, even those who have already heard should hear again. 

若比丘欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事故共諍，
If any monk seeks to destroy the harmony of the sangha and actively holds onto such an issue causing disputes,

諸比丘語是比丘言：『長老！莫破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事故共諍，
The other monks should say to this monk: 'Elder! Do not work so hard in causing conflicts leading to the breaking of the Sangha,

當與僧同事。何以故？
Instead, work together with the monastery. Why?

和合僧歡喜不諍，共一學如水乳合，
A harmonious Sangha is joyful without disputes, learning together like milk mixed with water,

如法說法照明安樂住。長老捨此破僧因緣事。』
Practicing the dharma illuminates and 安乐 lives. Elder, abandon this cause of disrupting the Sangha.'

是比丘諸比丘如是諫時，堅持是事不捨者，
If the monk, when advised by the other monks in this way, stubbornly holds onto this matter without letting go,

諸比丘應第二、第三諫。
The monks should proceed to advise a second and third time.

為捨是事故，第二、第三諫時，捨是事好；
For abandoning this, it is good if the monk renounces it by the second or third advice;

若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」
If he does not renounce it, he incurs the Sanga-Bhashi-Shi.



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




和合僧者，不別眾，諸比丘雖復鬪諍更相導說，但一界一眾一處住一布薩自恣故，名為和合僧。
Harmonious monks do not separate themselves, even though monks may quarrel and counsel each other, they live in one community, perform one Uposatha, and observe Pravarana together; thus, they are called harmonious monks.

齊幾許當言破和合僧勤方便執持破僧事？
How much zeal and effort must be spoken of to uphold the matter of disrupting the harmonious monks?

若比丘於十二事：戒序、四波羅夷、十三僧伽婆尸沙、二不定、三十尼薩耆波夜提、九十二波夜提、四波羅提提舍尼、眾學法、七滅諍法、隨順法，不制者制、制者便開，是名破和合僧事。
If a monk in twelve matters: order of precepts, four Parajikas, thirteen Sanghadisesas, two undetermined, thirty Nissaggiya Pacittiyas, ninety-two Pacittiyas, four Patidesaniyas, many learning rules, seven rules of dispute settlement, rules of harmony, impose what is not imposed, or open what is imposed, it is called disrupting the harmony of the monks.

復次五眾罪不制者制、制者便開，是名破和合僧事。
Further, imposing non-regulated or opening regulated matters in the five groups of offenses is called disrupting the harmony of the monks.

復次四眾罪不制者制、制者便開，是名破和合僧事。
Further, imposing non-regulated or opening regulated matters in the four groups of offenses is called disrupting the harmony of the monks.

復次三眾罪、二眾罪、一眾罪、四波羅夷，不制者制、制者便開，是名破和合僧事。
Further, imposing non-regulated or opening regulated matters in the three groups of offenses, two groups, one group, and four Parajikas is called disrupting the harmony of the monks.

復次六作捨法：折伏羯磨、不語羯磨、發喜羯磨、擯出羯磨、舉羯磨、別住羯磨，於此六作捨法，不制者制、制者便開，是名破和合僧事。
Further, in the six “release” actions: suppression karma, silence karma, delight karma, expulsion karma, accusation karma, separation karma, imposing non-regulated or opening regulated matters is called disrupting the harmony of the monks.




破和合僧比丘者，如提婆達多也。
The monk who disrupts harmony, like Devadatta.




諸比丘者，若一、若二、若眾多、若眾僧。
Monks, whether one, or two, or many, or the whole assembly.




處三諫，多人中三諫，眾僧中三諫。

Three kinds of advice: advice in private, advice among many people, advice among the congregation of monks.

屏處三諫者，問言：「長老！汝實破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，乃至十二法不制者制、制者便開耶？」

Advising in private involves asking, "Elder! Are you actually diligently implementing methods to disrupt the monk community, even modifying rules that should not be modified, or relaxing rules that should not be relaxed?"

答言：「實爾。」

They respond, "Indeed."

是比丘即便諫言：「長老！汝莫為破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，於十二事不制者制、制者便開。

The monk immediately advises, "Elder! Do not diligently engage in actions to disrupt the monk community, modifying things that shouldn't be modified or relaxing things that shouldn't be relaxed among the twelve matters.

破僧者，此是大罪，墮惡道入泥犁中，長夜受苦。

Disrupting the monk community is a grave sin, leading one to the hellish realm of suffering through long nights.

我今慈心諫汝，饒益故受我語，一諫已過餘二諫在，捨此事不？」

I advise you with kind intentions now, for your benefit. Will you heed my words after the first advice, or will you abandon this matter after the remaining two advices?"

若不捨，第二、第三亦如是。

If you do not abandon, the second and third advice will also follow the same way.

多人前三諫，亦如是。

The three advices among many people are also the same.

復不止者，將至僧中，應作求聽羯磨：

If not stopped, bring it to the monk congregation and perform the request for decision ceremony:

「大德僧聽！是某甲比丘為破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。

"Noble monks, listen! This certain monk is diligently engaged in disrupting the monk community. Three advices were given in private, and three among many people, still unresolved.

若僧時到，今於僧中三諫令止。」

If the monk time arrives, three advices will be given in the monk congregation to stop."

僧中復問言：「長老！汝實為破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，乃至不制者制、制者便開耶？」

The monk congregation will ask again, "Elder! Are you actually diligently implementing methods to disrupt the monk community, even modifying rules that should not be modified, or relaxing rules that should not be relaxed?"

答言：「實爾。」

They respond, "Indeed."

即應諫言：「今眾僧諫汝，長老！莫為破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，

The monks should then say, "Now, the congregation advises you, elder! Do not diligently engage in actions to disrupt the monk community.

乃至不制者制、制者便開。破僧者，最大惡深重，當於惡道中長夜受苦。

Even modifying things that shouldn't be modified or relaxing things that shouldn't be relaxed. Disrupting the monk community is a grave and serious offense, causing long nights of suffering in the hellish realm.

今日眾僧慈心呵汝，當止此事。」

Today, the congregation advises you with kind intentions, asking you to stop this matter."

若不捨者，復第二、第三諫，亦如是說。

If not abandoned, the second and third advices are given in the same manner.

如是諫時，若捨者善；若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。

At the time of advice, if abandoned, it is good; if not abandoned, it leads to a serious offense against the monastic code


僧伽婆尸沙者，如上說。
Saṅghādisesa, as stated above.




處諫時，一諫不止，犯越比尼罪。
When a monk advises another privately and the latter does not stop after the first warning, it is a minor transgression.

第二、第三亦如是諫。
The same goes for the second and third warnings.

多人中諫時，一諫不止犯越比尼罪。
When advising in a group setting, not stopping after the first warning is a minor transgression.

第二、第三諫時，亦如是。
The same applies to the second and third warnings in a group.

至僧中初諫時，說未竟，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。
When advising in the Sangha, if stopped halfway, it's a minor transgression; if completed, it becomes an offense of expiation.

第二諫說未竟，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。
For the second warning in the Sangha, the same principle applies: stopping halfway is a minor transgression; completing it incurs another expiation.

第三諫說未竟，偷蘭罪；說竟，得僧伽婆尸沙。
For the third warning, if stopped halfway, it is an expiation offense; if completed, it results in a Sangha-disrupting offense.

僧伽婆尸沙罪起已，屏處諫、多人中諫及僧中諫，諸越比尼罪、諸偷蘭罪，一切盡合成一僧伽婆尸沙。
Once the offense of disrupting the Sangha arises, all associated minor and expiation offenses become one major Sangha-disrupting offense.

若中間止者，隨所止處治罪。
If cessation occurs midway, the punishment is according to where it stopped.

是故說：「若比丘欲破和合僧故勤方便執持破僧事，乃至三諫不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」
Therefore it is said: "If a monk, intent on disrupting the harmony of the Sangha, persists in disruptive efforts despite three warnings, it becomes a Sangha-disrupting offense."

(第十戒竟)
(The end of the tenth precept)




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and elaborated as above.

爾時諸比丘為提婆達多作舉羯磨時，初羯磨竟無有遮者，第二羯磨竟亦無有遮者，
At that time, when the monks conducted a formal act of accusation against Devadatta, the first and second formal acts were completed without any objection.

第三羯磨時，提婆達多看六群比丘面，而作是言：
When the third formal act was being conducted, Devadatta looked at the six groups of monks and said:

「六群比丘！汝等長夜承事我，共我從事。
"O six groups of monks! You have long supported and worked with me.

今眾僧為我作舉羯磨，已至再說而皆默然。
Now, when the sangha conducts a formal act of accusation for me, they are silent even upon two proclamations.

汝等今日持我任於眾人如酪塗麨與烏；如酥塗餅與那俱羅；如油和飯與野干。
Today, you let me face the crowds alone like butter spread on grain for crows, like ghee spread on cakes for jackals, like oil mixed with rice for wild cats.

修梵行者，為人所困，而坐觀之。」
Those who practice the holy life are distressed by others and sit observing."

六群比丘即起作是言：「如是！如是！長老！
The six groups of monks immediately rose and said, "Indeed! Indeed! Elder!

是法語比丘、律語比丘。
These are words of Dhamma and words of discipline.

是比丘所說，皆是我等欲忍可事。
The things spoken by this monk are things we wish to patiently endure.

是比丘所見欲忍可事，我等亦欲忍可。
The things seen by this monk that should be endured patiently, we too wish to endure patiently.

是比丘知說，非不知說。」
This monk knows how to speak and does not lack verbal knowledge."

是時有多人遮羯磨不成，時諸比丘語六群比丘：
At this time, there were many who blocked the formal act from succeeding, and the monks said to the six groups of monks:

「長老！莫助提婆達多作破和合僧同語同見，當與僧同事。
"Elders! Do not assist Devadatta in causing a schism in the sangha with unified speech and views, you should act in harmony with the sangha.

一切僧和合歡喜不諍，共一學如水乳合，如法說法照明安樂住。」
All the monks, united and joyful without dispute, learn together as milk mixes with water, living in peace as per the Dhamma."

作如是一諫不止，第二、第三諫猶故不止。
Despite such admonishment, they did not stop; even after the second and third admonitions, they still did not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣，具白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, fully informed the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是六群比丘與愚癡提婆達多欲破和合僧，同語同見，已一諫、二諫、三諫不止者。
The Buddha told the monks: "These six groups of monks, with the foolish Devadatta, wish to break the harmony of the sangha with unified speech and views, and have not stopped despite one, two, or three admonishments.

汝去屏處三諫、多人中三諫，應僧中三諫，令捨是事。」
You should admonish them in private three times, among the public three times, and in the sangha three times, urging them to abandon this matter."

比丘受教即於屏處問六群比丘：「汝等實與愚癡提婆達多，破和合僧，同語同見為黨。
The monks, following the instruction, in private asked the six groups of monks: "Do you indeed, together with the foolish Devadatta, act as a faction to break the unity of the sangha with unified speech and views?

諸比丘已再三諫，故不止耶？」
Have the monks not admonished you three times, and yet you persisted?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Indeed."

即便諫之：「汝六群比丘！莫與提婆達多破和合僧同語同見，
Then they admonished them: "You six groups of monks! Do not join Devadatta in breaking the unity of the sangha with unified speech and views.

汝等當與僧同事，一切僧和合歡喜無諍，同一學如水乳合，如法說法照明安樂住。
You should act in harmony with the sangha, with all monks united and joyful without dispute, learning together as milk mixes with water, living in peace as per the Dhamma."

諸長老！破和合僧是最大罪，墮惡道入泥犁中長夜受苦。
"Elders! Causing a schism in the sangha is the gravest sin, leading to rebirth in a wretched realm, suffering for a long time.

我今慈心諫汝，欲饒益故，當受我語。
With a heart of compassion, I now admonish you, for your benefit, you should heed my words.

一諫已過二諫在，當捨是事。」
Having already admonished once, twice remains, you should abandon this act."

若不止，第二、第三亦如是說。
If they do not stop, say the same for the second and the third time.

復於多人中三諫亦如是。
Also, admonish them three times in public in the same way.

復不止者，僧中應作求聽羯磨：
If they still do not stop, the sangha should conduct a formal act seeking permission:

「大德僧聽！是六群比丘與提婆達多破和合僧同語同見，
"Venerable Sangha, listen! These six groups of monks, with Devadatta, are breaking the unity of the sangha with unified speech and views.

已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。
They have been admonished three times in private and three times in public, and yet they persist.

若僧時到，當於僧中三諫令止。」
When it is time for the sangha, admonish them three times within the sangha to make them stop."

即於僧中問六群比丘：「汝等實與提婆達多破和合僧同語同見，
Then, within the sangha, ask the six groups of monks: "Do you indeed align with Devadatta in breaking the unity of the sangha with unified speech and views?

已屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止耶？」
Have you not been admonished three times in private and three times in public, and yet you still persist?"

答言：「實爾。」
They reply, "Indeed."

即復諫言：「六群比丘！汝等莫與提婆達多共破和合僧同語同見。
Then admonish again: "O six groups of monks! Do not join Devadatta in breaking the unity of the sangha with unified speech and views.

破和合僧最是惡事，墮惡道入泥梨中長夜受苦。
Breaking the unity of the sangha is the worst of deeds, leading to rebirth in a wretched realm, suffering for a long time.

今僧慈心諫汝，饒益故，當受僧語。
The sangha now admonishes you with a compassionate heart, for your benefit, you should heed the sangha's words.

一諫已過二諫在，汝捨是事。」
Having already admonished once, twice remains, you should give up this act."

若不止者，第二、第三亦如是諫，猶故不捨。
If they do not stop, admonish them similarly for the second and third time, and still if they do not desist:

諸比丘復以是事具白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The monks then reported this matter fully to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Summon the six groups of monks."

即呼來。來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝等實與愚癡提婆達多同語同見破和合僧，
They were summoned. Having come, the Buddha asked the six groups of monks: "Do you indeed, with the foolish Devadatta, align in speech and views to break the unity of the sangha?

諸比丘已屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫，猶故不捨耶？」
Have you not been admonished three times in private, three times in public, and three times in the sangha, and yet you do not desist?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They answered, "Indeed, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事，汝常不聞我種種因緣，
The Buddha said, "Monks! This is a bad deed, have you not always heard of the various causes and conditions,

呵責𢤱悷難諫，種種因緣讚歎柔軟易諫耶？
blaming those difficult to admonish, and praising those who are gentle and easy to admonish?

汝等云何𢤱悷難諫？
Why are you difficult to admonish?

此非法、非律、非是佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is neither the Dhamma, nor the discipline, nor the Buddha's instruction, and cannot be used to nurture good qualities."




諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是六群比丘共提婆達多同語同見徒自受苦？」

The monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! How did the six groups of monks suffer by agreeing and acting with Devadatta?"

佛告諸比丘：「是六群比丘不但今日同語同見徒自受苦，過去世時已曾如是。」

The Buddha told the monks, "These six groups of monks did not only suffer today from their agreement with Devadatta; they did so in the past as well."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？唯願說之。」

The monks said to the Buddha, "Did they really? Please tell us."

佛告諸比丘：「過去世時，有城名波羅奈，國名伽尸，於空閑處有五百獼猴，遊行林中，到一尼俱律樹。

The Buddha said, "In a past life, in a city called Varanasi, in the land of Kashi, there were five hundred monkeys living in a secluded place who roamed around the forest and came to a tree called Nigrodha.

樹下有井，井中有月影現。

Beneath the tree, there was a well and the reflection of the moon appeared in it.

時獼猴主見是月影，語諸伴言：『月今日死，落在井中，當共出之，莫令世間長夜闇冥。』

At that time, the leader of the monkeys saw the moon's reflection and said to his companions, 'Today the moon has died and fallen into the well. We must retrieve it so that the world does not have prolonged darkness.'

共作議言：『云何能出？』

They consulted with each other, saying, 'How can we retrieve it?'

時獼猴主言：『我知出法，我捉樹枝，汝捉我尾，展轉相連，乃可出之。』

The monkey leader said, 'I know how to retrieve it. I will grab a tree branch, and you all hold onto my tail, and in turn, each other's tails, and then we can lift it out.'

時諸獼猴即如主語，展轉相捉，小未至水，連獼猴重，樹弱枝折，一切獼猴墮井水中。

The monkeys did as the leader said, each holding the tail of the other, and before they reached the water, due to the weight of the monkeys and the weakness of the branches, all the monkeys fell into the water in the well.

爾時樹神便說偈言：

At that time, the tree spirit spoke these verses:



是等騃榛獸，
These foolish and chaotic beasts,

癡眾共相隨；
The ignorant masses follow them together;




坐自生苦惱，  
Sitting causes one's own distress,

何能救世間？  
How can one save the world?




：「爾時獼猴主者，今提婆達多是。
The Buddha told the monks: "The leader of the monkeys at that time is now Devadatta.

爾時餘獼猴者，今六群比丘是。
The other monkeys at that time are now the group of six monks.

爾時已曾更相隨順受諸苦惱，今復如是。」
They had already supported each other through sufferings at that time, and now it is the same again."

佛告諸比丘：「依止王舍城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "Gather all the monks residing in Rajagaha and establish precepts for the benefit of ten reasons, so that even those who have heard them should hear them again.

若比丘同意相助，若一、若二、若眾多同語同見，欲破和合僧。
If a monk agrees with others, whether one, two, or many, to speak and see similarly, desiring to break the harmony of the community.

是比丘諸比丘諫時，是同意比丘言：『長老！莫說是比丘好惡事。
When other monks advise this monk, the agreeing monk says: 'Elder! Do not discuss the good or bad aspects of this monk.

何以故？是法語比丘、律語比丘。
Why? Because he is a monk who speaks according to the Dharma and discipline.

是比丘所說，皆是我等欲忍可事。
What this monk says, we are all willing to tolerate.

是比丘所見欲忍可事，我等亦欲忍可。
What this monk sees as tolerable, we also wish to tolerate.

是比丘知說，非不知說。』
The monk knows how to speak, not that he does not know how to speak.'

諸比丘諫是同意比丘：『長老！莫作是語「是法語比丘、律語比丘。」
The monks advise the agreeing monk: 'Elder! Do not say "he is a monk who speaks according to the Dharma and discipline."

何以故？是非法語比丘、非律語比丘。
Why? Because he is a monk who speaks not according to the Dharma, not according to the discipline.

諸長老！莫助破僧事，當樂助和合僧。
Elders! Do not assist in breaking the community, but take pleasure in assisting in the harmony of the community.

何以故？僧和合歡喜不諍，共一學如水乳合，如法說法照明安樂住。
Why? Because when the community is harmonious, joyful with no disputes, they study together like water mixed with milk, dwelling peacefully with teachings according to the law illuminating them.

諸長老！當捨此破僧事。』
Elders! You should abandon these matters that break the community.'

是同意比丘，諸比丘如是諫時，堅持不捨者，諸比丘應第二、第三諫，捨此事故。
If the agreeing monk, when advised like this by other monks, persists and does not give up, the monks should warn him a second and third time to abandon the matter.

第二、第三諫時，捨是事好；若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」
When warned a second and third time, it is good to abandon the matter; if not, it is an offense of sanghadisesa."



比丘者，提婆達多是。
The monk is Devadatta.




同語同見比丘者，六群比丘也。
The monks who have the same speech and view are the group of six monks.

若一、若二、若眾多同語同見者，或有同語不同見、或有同見不同語、或有同語亦同見、或非同語非同見。
Whether one, two, or many have the same speech and view, some may have the same speech with different views, the same views with different speech, both the same speech and views, or neither the same speech nor views.

同語非同見者，言語相助不同彼見，是名同語非同見。
Those with the same speech but different views, whose language aids each other but do not share the same view, are called having the same speech but different views.

同見不同語者，同彼所見而不助說，是名同見不同語。
Those with the same views but different speech, who share the same view but do not assist in speech, are called having the same views but different speech.

同語同見者，助彼言語同其所見，是名同語同見。
Those with the same speech and views, who assist each other's language in accordance with their views, are called having the same speech and view.

非同語非同見者，不助彼語亦不同見，是名非同語非同見。
Those with neither the same speech nor views, who do not assist in each other's language or views, are called neither having the same speech nor views.

是中同語非同見及同語同見者，當呵諫。
Among these, those with the same speech but different views and those with the same speech and views should be admonished.

云何名為同語同見法？
What is the so-called rule of having the same speech and view?

於十二法不制者制、制者便開，是名同語同見法。
In the twelve dharmas, those not restricted should be restricted, and those restricted should be liberated; this is called the rule of having the same speech and view.

復次五眾罪不制者制、制者便開，四眾、三眾、二眾、一眾罪，亦如是，不制者制、制者便開。
Again, for the offenses of the five groups, those not restricted should be restricted, and those restricted should be liberated; similarly for the offenses of the four, three, two, and one groups.

復次六作捨法不制者制、制者便開，是名同語同見法。
Additionally, in the six relinquishing dharmas, those not restricted should be restricted, and those restricted should be liberated; this is called the rule of having the same speech and view.

諸比丘當諫是比丘言：「長老！莫與破和合僧勤方便同語同見。」
The monks should admonish this monk, saying: "Elder! Do not have the same speech and view as those who strive to disrupt the harmony of the monastic community."

諸比丘諫是比丘時，執是事堅持者，謂六群比丘也。
When the monks admonish this monk and he persistently holds onto this matter, he is said to be one of the group of six monks.




諸比丘者，若僧、若多人、若一人也。
Monks, whether a community, a group, or an individual.




三諫者，屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫也。
The three admonitions are the private admonition, the admonition among many people, and the admonition among the monks.

屏處諫者：「汝諸長老實與破和合僧勤方便同語同見耶？」
The private admonition is: "Are you, the elders, truly speaking and seeing in concert with those who disrupt the harmonious Sangha?"

答言：「實爾。」
The response is: "Indeed."

復言：「長老！汝莫與破和合僧勤方便同語同見。 
They further say: "Elder! Do not speak and see in concert with those who disrupt the harmonious Sangha.

破僧者最大惡事，當墮惡道長夜受苦。
Disrupting the Sangha is the greatest evil, leading to falling into a woeful path and suffering long nights.

我今慈心諫汝，當捨是事。
Out of compassion, I now advise you to renounce this matter.

一諫已過二諫在。捨此事好。」
Once the first admonition is done, the second follows. It is good to abandon this matter.

若不捨者，第二、第三亦如是說。
If they do not renounce, the second and third admonitions are spoken in the same way.

多人中三諫，亦復如是。
The admonitions among many people are also like this.

復於僧中三羯磨諫，猶不止者，僧伽婆尸沙。
Again, within the Sangha, if three formal acts of admonition do not stop them, it leads to a Sangha-Kamma offense.



僧伽婆尸沙者，如上說。
Sanghabhishaja, as mentioned above.




是比丘屏處一諫不止，越比尼罪。

The monk who refuses to stop after being advised once privately transgresses the minor rule.

第二、第三亦如是。

The second and third time are the same.

多人中三諫，亦如是。

In a group, the monk who is advised three times also transgresses the minor rule.

僧中初羯磨未竟，不止，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。

In the community, if during the first admonishment the monk refuses to stop before the formal meeting is over, it is a minor transgression; if after, it is a more serious offense.

第二羯磨未竟，不止，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。

During the second admonishment, refusing to stop before it's over is still a minor transgression; after, it remains a more serious offense.

第三羯磨未竟，偷蘭罪；說竟，僧伽婆尸沙。

During the third, if before it's over, it is a more serious offense; after it concludes, it becomes a Sanghadisesa offense.

僧伽婆尸沙罪起已，屏處三諫越比尼罪、多人中三諫越比尼罪，及僧中偷蘭罪，一切盡共成一僧伽婆尸沙。

When a Sanghadisesa offense is committed, three private exhortations, three group exhortations, and a community exhortation altogether count as one Sanghadisesa offense.

中間止者，隨止處治罪。

If the monk stops before completing the whole process, the offense is judged according to where they ceased.

是故世尊說：「若比丘同意相助，若一、若二、若眾多同語同見，乃至三諫不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」

Therefore the Buddha said: "If monks agree to help each other, whether one, whether two, or many, if they are of the same speech and view, and are exhorted three times but do not change, it is a Sanghadisesa offense."

(十一戒竟)

(End of the eleventh rule)



佛住俱舍彌國，廣說如上。
Buddha stayed in Kusha land and extensively explained as above.

爾時長老闡陀惡性難共語，諸比丘如法、如律教，作不可共語，如是言：
At that time, Elder Chanda was difficult to converse with due to his bad nature, and when monks instructed him according to Dharma and Vinaya, he made it difficult to communicate, saying:

「諸長老！莫語我若好若惡，我亦不語諸長老若好若惡。
"Honored elders! Do not speak to me of good or bad, and I will not speak to you of good or bad.

何以故？汝等皆是雜姓，我家民吏，譬如烏鳥銜雜類骨聚在一處，何能教我佛法僧事？
Why is that? You are of various mixed castes, whereas my family is of officials, like a bird gathering bones of mixed variety in one place, how can you teach me matters of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha?

皆是我許。從菩薩出家，我常隨侍，至于今日。
It is all according to my approval. Since I left home when the Bodhisattva renounced the world, I have always served, up to this day.

唯佛教我，我當受持。」
Only what the Buddha teaches me will I uphold."

時諸比丘語闡陀言：
Then the monks spoke to Chanda, saying:

「長老！諸比丘善說所犯波羅提木叉中事，汝莫自身作不可共語，汝身當作可共語。
"Elder! Monks explain well the matters of offense in the Pratimoksha, do not create difficulty in communication, your conduct should be accommodating.

長老！汝當為諸比丘說，如法、如律教，諸比丘亦當為汝說，如法、如律教。
Elder! You should instruct monks according to Dharma and Vinaya, and monks should also instruct you accordingly.

何以故？如來眾得如是增長，所謂共語共說共諫，共罪中出故。
Why is that? Because the community of the Tathagata grows in this way, through communication, discourse, admonition, and emerging together from faults.

長老捨自身作不可共語。」
Let the elder renounce making himself difficult to converse with."

一諫不捨，第二、第三諫猶故不止。
With a single admonition, he did not relent, even after the second and third admonitions, he persisted.

諸比丘以是因緣，往白世尊：
On this account, the monks went to inform the Blessed One:

「長老闡陀自身作不可共語，乃至三諫不止。」
"Elder Chanda himself makes communication difficult, even after three admonitions, he has not stopped."

佛告諸比丘：
The Buddha told the monks:

「是闡陀自用不可共語，乃至三諫不止者。
"Chanda himself is making communication difficult, not stopping even after three admonitions.

汝去屏處三諫不止者，復於多人中三諫。
If he does not stop in private after three admonitions, admonish him again among the many.

復不止者，乃至僧中作求聽羯磨。」
If he persists, then perform the Sangha-kamma in the assembly.

應作是說：
It should be said:

「大德僧聽！是長老闡陀惡性難共語，諸比丘如法善說所犯波羅提木叉中事，自用作不可共語，乃至已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。
"Honored monks, listen! Elder Chanda is of malicious nature and difficult to converse with, and when monks teach well according to Dharma the offenses in the Pratimoksha, he makes communication difficult, even after being admonished privately and publicly three times, he does not desist.

若僧時到，今於僧中三諫，令止此事。」
If it is the time of the Sangha, now in the assembly, admonish him three times, making him stop this matter."

即於僧中諫：
In the assembly, he was admonished:

「長老闡陀！汝實惡性難共語，諸比丘如法如律說，汝自作不可共語，乃至已屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止耶？」
"Elder Chanda! You are truly of a malicious nature difficult to converse with, and when monks speak to you according to Dharma and Vinaya, you make communication difficult, even after being privately and publicly admonished three times, do you still not stop?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "Indeed."

應僧中諫言：
The admonition in the assembly should say:

「長老！汝莫惡性難共語，諸比丘如法善說所犯波羅提木叉中事，汝莫自身作不可共語，乃至如來眾得如是增長，所謂共語、共說、共諫、共罪中出故。
"Elder! Do not be of a malicious nature difficult to converse with, monks explain well according to Dharma the offenses in the Pratimoksha, do not make communication difficult, until the Tathagata's community can thus grow, through shared communication, discourse, admonition, and jointly emerging from faults.

僧今慈心諫汝，饒益故。
The Sangha now admonishes you out of compassionate intention, for your benefit.

一諫已過二諫在，當止此事。」
After the first admonition, the second remains, cease this conduct."

若不捨者，更第二、第三亦如是諫，猶故不止。
If he does not stop, then by the second and third also admonish, yet he persists.

諸比丘復以是事，往白世尊，佛言：「呼闡陀來。」
On this matter, the monks again informed the Blessed One, who said, "Call Chanda here."

即便呼來。
He was then called.

佛問闡陀：
The Buddha asked Chanda:

「汝實惡性難共語，乃至僧中三諫不止耶？」
"Are you truly of a malicious nature difficult to converse with, not stopping even after being admonished thrice in the assembly?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "Indeed."

佛言：
The Buddha said:

「闡陀！此是惡事。
"Chanda! This is a bad deed.

汝常不聞我種種因緣，呵責自用、讚歎不自用。
Do you not always hear my various teachings, reproving personal conduct, praising unselfish conduct?

汝今云何自用反戾？
How can you now act contrary to your own benefit?

此非法、非律、非是佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is against the Dharma, the Vinaya, and the Buddha's teaching, it cannot nurture good dharma."



諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是闡陀比丘而自用意作是言：『唯有佛語，我當受佛語。』」

The monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! Why does the monk named Chanda make up his mind to say: 'I will only accept the words of the Buddha'?"

「諸比丘！是闡陀比丘，不但今日不受餘人語，但信我語。過去世時，亦曾如是。」

"Monks! This monk Chanda not only refuses to accept words from others today, but has always believed only in my words. It was also like this in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？唯願樂聞。」

The monks said to the Buddha, "Has it always been so? We wish to hear more."

佛言：「如是。過去世時有城名波羅奈，國名伽尸。

The Buddha said, "Yes. In a past life, there was a city called Varanasi, in a country named Kashi.

爾時有一長者，有奴字阿磨由，為性兇惡。

At that time there was an elder, who had a servant named Amayou, who was of a violent nature.

爾時長者與諸婆羅門子遊戲園林，諸從人輩皆在園門外住。

At that time, the elder was playing in the garden with the sons of Brahmins, while the entourage waited outside the garden gate.

時阿磨由在園門外打諸從人，時諸從人被打者各告其主，

Then Amayou was outside the garden gate beating the entourage, and those who were beaten each complained to their master.

時諸婆羅門子盡出呵之。

Then all the Brahmin sons came out to scold him.

時阿磨由不受其語，答諸婆羅門子言：『不隨汝語，我大家來呵我者，當受其語。』遂打不止。

At that time, Amayou did not heed their words and replied to the Brahmin sons, 'I do not follow your words. If my master comes and reprimands me, I will accept his words.' And continued beating them.

即來告阿摩由主。

They immediately went to inform Amayou's master.

阿摩由主生得天眼，觀是鬪處下有金銀伏藏，其地凶故令其鬪耳。

Amayou's master was born with divine vision and observed that beneath the site of the fight there was hidden treasure of gold and silver, and because the land was fierce, it caused them to fight.

即往訶之，時奴即止。」

He immediately went to scold him, and then the servant stopped."

佛告諸比丘：「爾時長者豈異人乎？即我身是。

The Buddha told the monks, "Wasn't the elder at that time a different person? It was I.

爾時阿摩由者，今闡陀比丘是。」

At that time, Amayou is the present monk Chanda."




諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是闡陀恃怙世尊，陵於他人。」

The monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! How is it that Chandra relies on the World Honored One and looks down on others?"

佛言：「比丘！是闡陀比丘，不但今日恃我輕於他人，過去世時已曾恃我輕於他人。」

The Buddha said, "Monks! Chandra, the monk, not only today relies on me to look down on others, but in past lives, he also relied on me to demean others."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」

The monks said to the Buddha, "Has it really been like this before?"

佛言：「如是。過去世時有城名波羅奈，國名伽尸。」

The Buddha said, "Indeed. In past lives, there was a city called Benares, in the country of Kashi."

時有弗盧醯大學婆羅門，為國王師，常教學五百童子。

At that time, there was a great scholar Brahmin, Purushasha, who was the king's teacher and constantly instructed five hundred students.

時婆羅門家生一奴，名迦羅呵，常使供給諸童子等。

In the Brahmin's house was a servant born, named Kalaha, who was constantly tasked to provide for the students.

婆羅門法，餘姓不得妄聞。

According to Brahmin law, those of non-Brahmin caste were not allowed to hear the teachings.

以奴親近供養故，得在其邊為諸童子說婆羅門法。

Because the servant was close in serving, he was able to stay by their side and listen to the Brahmin teachings spoken to the students.

是奴利根，聞說法言盡能憶持。

This servant was sharp-witted and could remember everything of what he heard spoken.

此奴一時共諸童子，小有嫌恨，便走他國。

At one time, this servant had a small conflict with the students and went off to another country.

詐自稱言：『我是弗盧醯婆羅門子，字耶若達多。』

He falsely claimed, "I am the son of Purushasha, a Brahmin, and my name is Yajnadatta."

語此國王師婆羅門言：『我是波羅奈國王師，弗盧醯子。故來至此，欲投大師學婆羅門法。』

He told the Brahmin teacher in this country, "I am the son of the teacher of the king of Benares, Purushasha. I have come to join the great master to study Brahmin law."

師答言：『可爾。』

The teacher replied, "That is permissible."

是奴聰明本已曾聞，今復重聞，聞悉能持。

The servant was naturally intelligent and had heard it all before; now he heard it again and could remember everything.

其師大喜，即令教授五百門徒。

The teacher was delighted and immediately appointed him to teach the five hundred disciples.

五百童子言：『汝代我教，我當往來王家。』

The five hundred students said, "You substitute for me in teaching, and I will go back and forth to the royal house."

是師婆羅門無有男兒，唯有一女，便作是念：『今可以女妻之耶？若達多常在我家，便如我子。』

This Brahmin teacher had no sons, only a daughter, and thought, "Can I give my daughter to him in marriage? If Yajnadatta is always in my household, he would be like my son."

即告之曰：『耶若達多當用我語。』

He told him, "Yajnadatta, you should follow my advice."

答言：『從教。』

He replied, "I will obey."

復告之言：『汝莫還波羅奈，常住此國，我今以女妻汝。』

He further said, "Do not return to Benares; always stay in this country. I will now give my daughter to you as wife."

答言：『從教。』

He replied, "I will obey."

即與。其女在家，如兒共作生活，家漸豐樂。

He did so. The daughter, at home, lived like a child, and the household gradually prospered and became happy.

是耶若達多為人難可，婦為作食恒懷瞋恚，甜酢醎淡生熟不能適口。

This Yajnadatta was difficult, and his wife, when preparing food, was always angry, as sweet, sour, salty, bland, raw, or cooked did not suit his mouth.

婦常念言：『脫有行人，從波羅奈來者，當從彼受作飲食法，然後作供養夫主。』

The wife often thought, "If there is ever a traveler coming from Benares, I will learn how to prepare food from them, and then I will serve my husband accordingly."

彼弗盧醯婆羅門具聞是事，便作是念：『我奴迦羅呵逃在他國，當往捉來，或可得奴。』

The Brahmin Purushasha, on fully hearing of this matter, thought, "My servant Kalaha has escaped to another country; I should go capture him and possibly regain my servant."

直便詣彼國。

He immediately went to that country.

時耶若達多與諸門徒，詣園遊戲在於中路，遙見本主，即便驚怖密語門徒：『諸童子汝等還去，各自誦習。』

At that time, Yajnadatta, with his disciples, went to a garden to play; on the way, he saw his master from afar, and in fear, he secretly said to his disciples, "You students, return and each practice on your own."

門徒去已便到主前，頭面禮足，白其主言：『我來此國，稱噵大家是我之父，便投此國師大學婆羅門為師。以大學經典故，師婆羅門與女為婦，願尊今日勿彰我是事，當與奴直奉上大家主。』

After the disciples left, he approached the master, bowed his head and feet, and said to his master, "I came to this country claiming that the great sage was my father and became a student of this country's great Brahmin teacher. Because of the great classical teachings, the teacher gave me his daughter as wife. I hope today the esteemed one will not expose this matter. I will offer service as a servant."

婆羅門善解世事，即便答言：『汝實我兒何所復言？但作方便早見發遣。』

The Brahmin, understanding world affairs well, replied, "You are truly like my son, what else is there to say? Just make arrangements to send me off soon."

即將歸家，告家中言：『我所親來。』

He then took him home and told his household, "My relative has come."

其婦歡喜，辦種種飲食，奉食已訖，小空閑時，密禮婆羅門足，而問之曰：『我奉事夫耶若達多，飲食供養常不可意，願今指授本在家時何所食噉，當如先法為作飲食。』

The wife was delighted, prepared a variety of foods, served the meals, and when there was a small amount of free time, she secretly bowed to the Brahmin's feet and asked, "I serve my husband Yajnadatta; the meals I prepare are never to his liking. I wish now to learn what meals were eaten at home originally, so that I can prepare food as before."

客婆羅門便即瞋恚，而作是念：『如是！如是！子困苦他子女。』

The guest Brahmin was suddenly angry and thought, "Is it so! Is it so! My child has troubled another's daughter."

語此女言：『汝但速發遣我，我臨去時，當教汝一偈，汝誦是偈時，當使汝夫無言。』

He said to the daughter, "You should send me away quickly. When I am leaving, I will teach you a verse. When you recite this verse, it will render your husband speechless."

是女即語夫言：『尊婆羅門故從遠來，宜早發遣。』

The daughter then said to her husband, "The esteemed Brahmin has come from afar; he should be sent off early."

夫即念言：『如婦所說，宜應早遣莫令久住，言語漏失，損我不少。』

The husband thought, "As my wife has said, it is better to send him off early, not to let him stay long, his words may leak and cause me much harm."

便大與財物，教婦作食，自行為主求伴。

He generously gave wealth, instructed his wife to prepare food, and personally acted as the host to seek companions.

婦於後奉食訖已，禮足辭別請求先偈。

After the meal was served, the wife bowed to say goodbye and requested the verse.

即教說偈言：

He then taught her the verse to say:



無親遊他方，
Traveling far away alone, without relatives,

欺誑天下人，
Deceiving and duping people all over the world,




麁食是常食，　　
Coarse food is common food,

但食復何嫌？
But why should one complain about food?




「『今與汝此偈，若彼瞋恚嫌食惡時，便在其邊，背面微誦，令其得聞。』

'Now I give you this verse, if they are angry and dislike the food, just recite it quietly beside them, facing away, so they may hear it.'

作是教已，便還本國。

After giving this instruction, he returned to his home country.

是耶若達多送主去已，每至食時，還復瞋恚。

After Yajnadatta saw the master off, he became angry again every time it was time to eat.

婦於夫邊試誦其偈，時夫聞是偈已，心即不喜，便作是念：

The wife tried reciting the verse beside her husband, and when the husband heard it, he was immediately displeased, thinking:

『咄是老物，發我臭穢。』

'Alas, this old thing exposes my stench.'

從是已後常作軟語，恐婦向人說其陰私。」

From then on, he often spoke softly, fearing that his wife would reveal his secrets to others.

佛告諸比丘：

The Buddha told the monks:

「時波羅奈國弗盧醯婆羅門者，豈異人乎？即我身是。

'Was the Brahmin Varaṇāsi different from anyone else? It was me.'

時奴迦羅呵者，今闡陀比丘是。

'The servant Nāgara at that time is now the monk Chandra.'

彼於爾時已曾恃我𣣋易他人，

At that time, he relied on me to look down on others,

今復如是恃我勢力𣣋易他人。」

and now again relies on my power to look down on others.'



：「依止俱舍彌比丘，皆盡令集，乃至已聞者，當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "Rely on Abhidharma monks, gather them all, and even those who have heard before should hear again.

若比丘自用戾語，諸比丘如法、如律教時，便自用意，作是言：『汝莫語我若好若惡，我亦不語汝若好若惡。』

If a monk uses harsh words, when the monks teach according to the Dharma and the rules, he should consciously say: 'Do not speak to me of either good or bad, and I will not speak to you of either good or bad.'

諸比丘諫彼比丘言：『長老！諸比丘如法、如律教，汝莫自用意。

The monks admonish that monk, saying: 'Elder! The monks teach according to the Dharma and the rules, do not act on your own opinion.

諸比丘教汝應當信受，汝亦應如法如律教諸比丘。

The teachings from the monks you should sincerely accept, and you too should teach the monks according to the Dharma and the rules.

何以故？如來弟子眾展轉相教、展轉相諫、共罪中出故，善法得增長。』

Why so? Because the disciples of the Tathagata mutually teach and admonish each other, emerge from sin together, thereby the good Dharma can flourish.'

諸比丘諫是比丘時，應捨是事。

When the monks admonish this monk, he should abandon this matter.

若不捨者，復第二、第三諫。

If he does not abandon it, a second and third admonition should follow.

捨者善，若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」

It is good to abandon; if not abandoned, it is a matter for Saṅghādisesa."



比丘自用戾語者，闡陀比丘也。  
The monk who uses harsh language is the monk Chanda.




諸比丘如法、如律教者，謂戒序、四波羅夷、十三僧伽婆尸沙、二不定法、三十尼薩耆波夜提、九十二波夜提、四波羅提提舍尼、眾學法、七滅諍法、隨順法，以此法律展轉相教。
The teachings for monks in accordance with the Dharma and Vinaya refer to the order of precepts, the four parajikas, the thirteen sanghadisesas, the two undetermined laws, the thirty nissagiya pacittiyas, the ninety-two pacittiyas, the four patidesaniyas, the educational laws, the seven methods of resolving disputes, and the compliance methods, using this legalistic approach to teach continually.

復次五眾罪法、四眾罪法、三眾罪法、二眾罪法、一眾罪法。
Furthermore, there are the five kinds of offenses, four kinds of offenses, three kinds of offenses, two kinds of offenses, and one kind of offense.

復次六作捨法，展轉相教。
Furthermore, the six methods of relinquishment, which continue to be taught in succession.

復次波羅夷法、僧伽婆尸沙、波夜提，乃至越比尼罪，實非不實、時非不時、饒益非不饒益、軟語非麁言，慈心故，不求過，是名如法如律展轉相教也。
Furthermore, the parajika offenses, sanghadisesa offenses, pacittiya offenses, up to the offenses of violating the Vinaya, whether real or unreal, timely or untimely, beneficial or unbeneficial, gentle words or harsh words, are taught with compassionate intention, not seeking fault, and this is called continual instruction in accordance with the Dharma and Vinaya.



是比丘者，闡陀是也。
The monk is Channa.




诸比丘者，谓一人、多人、僧。
Monks are referred to as one person, many people, or a sangha.




處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫也。

The three admonitions are private admonition, admonition among several people, and admonition in the assembly.

屏處者，問言：「長老！汝實自用戾語，諸比丘如法、如律教，汝自身作不可共語耶？」

In private admonition, one asks, "Elder! You are indeed using harsh words while others speak according to the Dharma and vinaya; do you act in an unsociable manner?"

答言：「實爾。」

The response is, "Indeed."

即便諫言：「長老！汝莫自用戾語，諸比丘如法、如律教，汝應當受，莫自身作不可共語，乃至展轉相教，得善法增長故。

Then the admonition continues, "Elder! Do not use harsh words; when others teach according to the Dharma and vinaya, you should accept it and not act unsociably, because mutual teaching leads to the growth of good dharma.

我今慈心教，汝當捨此事，一諫已過二諫在。」

Now, with a heart of compassion, I teach you to abandon this matter; having received the first admonition, the second remains."

若不捨者，第二、第三亦復如是諫。

If not abandoned, the second and third admonitions follow in the same way.

多人中三諫亦如是。

The three admonitions among several people are the same.

猶不止者，僧中作求聽羯磨。

If it still does not stop, a formal act of the Sangha for admonition is carried out.

白言：「大德僧聽！是某甲比丘自用戾語。

It is declared, "Venerable Sangha, listen! This certain monk uses harsh words.

諸比丘如法、如律教，不受其語，已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。

Though other monks teach according to the Dharma and vinaya, he does not accept their words. He has already received private admonition and admonition among several people but still does not stop.

若僧時到，當於僧中三諫，令止此事。」

When the time comes, he must receive three admonitions in the assembly for this matter to cease."

即僧中問言：「長老實自用戾語，諸比丘如法、如律教，不受其語，屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不受耶？」

In the assembly, it is asked, "Elder, do you indeed use harsh words and not accept the teachings of the other monks according to the Dharma and vinaya, despite private and group admonitions?"

答言：「實爾。」

The response is, "Indeed."

即復僧中諫言：「長老！莫自用意，諸比丘如法、如律教，乃至展轉相教，得善法增長故。

The assembly then admonishes again, "Elder! Do not act on your own intentions; accept the teachings of the other monks as it leads to the growth of good dharma through mutual teaching.

今僧慈心諫汝，饒益故，當受僧語，捨此事。

Now, with compassion, the Sangha admonishes you for your benefit, so accept the Sangha's words and abandon this matter.

僧一諫已過，二諫在。」

The first admonition of the Sangha has passed, and the second remains."

若不止者，至第二、第三諫捨者善；不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。

If not ceased, upon the second or third admonition, it is good to abandon it; if not abandoned, it becomes a matter for a serious offense under the vinaya


僧伽婆尸沙者，如上說。
Saṅghādisesa, as stated above.




若比丘於屏處三諫，若多人中三諫時不止者，諫諫犯越比尼罪。
If a monk is admonished three times in private or in a group and does not desist, he commits an offense of wrong conduct.

僧中諫時，初諫時未竟，越比尼罪；羯磨說竟，偷蘭罪。
When admonished in the assembly, if the first admonishment is not completed, it is an offense of wrong conduct; after the declaration, it is an offense of expiation.

第二羯磨未竟，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。
If the second declaration is not completed, it is an offense of wrong conduct; after it is completed, it is an offense of expiation.

若第三羯磨未竟，偷蘭罪；說竟，僧伽婆尸沙，僧伽婆尸沙罪起已，
If the third declaration is not completed, it is an offense of expiation; after it is completed, it becomes an offense requiring a formal meeting of the Sangha.

屏處諫乃至僧中一切越比尼罪、一切偷蘭罪，皆合成一僧伽婆尸沙。
All offenses of wrong conduct and expiation from private admonishment to the assembly are combined into one offense requiring a formal meeting of the Sangha.

中間止者，隨止處治罪。
If one stops midway, the offense is treated according to where he stopped.

是故世尊說：「若比丘自用戾語，乃至三諫不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」
Therefore, the Blessed One said, "If a monk uses harsh words and does not give them up after being admonished three times, it is an offense requiring a formal meeting of the Sangha."

(十二戒竟)
(The end of the twelfth rule.)



，广说如上。
The Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, broadly speaking as above.

时六群比丘于迦尸黑山聚落作诸非威仪事：身非威仪、口非威仪、身口非威仪。
At that time, six groups of monks at the village in Kāśī's Black Mountain engaged in inappropriate conduct: improper behavior of body, speech, and both body and speech.

身非威仪者，若走来走去、跳行跳躑、倒行匍匐、扣盆戏笑、递相担负，作如是比种种身戏。
Improper bodily conduct includes running back and forth, jumping and skipping, crawling on the ground, tapping on bowls for laughter, carrying each other, and such various bodily amusements.

口非威仪者，作象鸣、骆鸣、牛鸣、羊鸣、长声、短声、或相唃耳，作如是比种种音声戏笑。
Improper speech conduct includes making sounds like elephants, camels, oxen, and sheep, making long and short sounds, or whispering in each other's ears, engaging in such various vocal amusements.

身口非威仪者，令身斑驳半边白、涂面令黑、染发令白、拍鼓弹琴、击节舞戏。
Improper conduct of both body and speech includes painting oneself with spots, half white and half black, painting the face black, dyeing hair white, beating drums, playing lutes, and dancing rhythmically.

时诸优婆塞来诣比丘，欲礼拜听法，见如是事，心生不喜，便作是言：
Lay devotees came to the monks, wishing to pay respects and listen to the teachings, but upon seeing these acts, they were displeased and said:

「阿阇梨！沙门之法所为善行，当令不信者信，信者增信。而今所为悉皆非法，更令不信增长，信者心坏。」
"Venerables! The proper conduct of monks should inspire faith in those who lack it and strengthen the faith of believers. Yet these actions are utterly improper, further increasing disbelief and corrupting the faith of believers."

六群比丘即瞋恚言：「汝为我师，为我和尚？此是逆理，我当教汝，汝反教我。」
The six groups of monks angrily replied, "Are you our teacher or abbot? This is unreasonable, I should be teaching you, yet you instruct me."

瞋恚增盛，作身害、口害、身口害。
Their anger increased, causing harm by body, speech, and both.

身害者，入其家中牵曳小儿、打拍推扑、破损器物、折犊子脚、刺坏羊眼，
Physical harm includes pulling children by force into houses, hitting and pushing, breaking objects, breaking the legs of calves, and blinding sheep.

至市肆上种种谷米、小麦、大麦、盐、麸、酥、油、乳酪，悉和杂合，不可分别。
They mixed various grains, rice, wheat, barley, salt, malt, butter, oil, and cheese in the marketplace, making them indistinguishable.

田中生苗，其须水者开水令去，不须水者决令满中，刈杀生苗焚烧熟谷，是名身暴害。
In the fields, they let water flow away from crops needing it and inundated those that didn’t, cutting and burning ripe grain, causing bodily harm.

口暴害者，诣王谗人加诬良善，是名口暴害。
Vocal harm involves slandering good people to the king, causing harm through speech.

身口暴害者，屏处藏身恐怖其人、牵挽无辜，是名身口暴害。
Both bodily and vocal harm include hiding to frighten people, dragging away the innocent, causing harm through body and speech.

诸优婆塞皆瞋恚言：「沙门释子作是非法，我等从今莫与供养。」
The lay devotees, angered, said, "The Śākya monks act unlawfully; from now on, we will not support them."

时彼比丘遂持钵乞食，其家见已，犹故与食，不至大惜。
When the monks went begging with bowls, their households gave them food reluctantly without regret.

诸优婆塞复作是要：「沙门释子作是暴害，我等从今莫令入门。」
The lay devotees decided, "These Śākya monks cause such harm; from now, we won’t let them enter our doors."

然后是比丘便到诸不信家乞食，初时与食。
Then the monks went begging at the homes of non-believers, and at first, they gave them food.

后续闻优婆塞断食不与：「定是恶人，我何以与食？」复不听入。
Later, hearing of the lay devotees' refusal, they thought, "They must be evil; why should we give them food?" and stopped allowing them in.

然后便作身邪命、口邪命、身口邪命。
Then they resorted to improper livelihood by body, speech, and both.

身邪命者，作水瓶、木器卖、作盛酥、革囊、绳索、结网、缝衣。
Improper livelihood by body includes making water bottles, wooden utensils for sale, butter containers, leather bags, ropes, nets, and sewing clothes.

学作饼卖、学卖医药、为人传信，如是种种求食，是名身邪命。
They learned to make and sell cakes, sell medicines, and deliver messages to others, seeking food in such ways as improper livelihood by body.

口邪命者，诵咒行术，咒蛇咒龙、咒鬼咒病、咒水咒火，如是种种求食，是名口邪命。
Improper livelihood by speech includes reciting mantras or spells, enchanting snakes, dragons, demons, and diseases, charming water and fire, seeking food in such ways as improper livelihood by speech.

身口邪命者，手自然火、口说咒术、手灌酥油、洒散芥子，如是种种求食，是名身口邪命。
Improper livelihood by both body and speech includes kindling fire naturally, chanting spells, pouring ghee, scattering mustard seeds, and seeking food in such ways.

时黑山聚落诸优婆塞，来诣舍卫城料理官事，官事讫已，往诣世尊，顶礼佛足已，却住一面白佛言：
The lay devotees from the Black Mountain village came to Śrāvastī to manage official affairs. Once completed, they approached the Blessed One, bowed at his feet, stood aside, and said to the Buddha:

「世尊！我是黑山聚落优婆塞，六群比丘在彼间住，於彼聚落作诸非法。广说如上。」
"World-Honored One! We are lay devotees from the Black Mountain village. The six groups of monks staying there are committing unlawful acts, as extensively described above."

唯愿世尊！当约敕之，令不在彼住者善。」
"May the Blessed One discipline them so they do not remain there."



爾時世尊為優婆塞，隨順說法示教利喜已，禮足而去。
At that time, the World Honored One, for the benefit of the laymen, explained the teachings and advised them joyfully, then he paid respects and left.

爾時世尊告阿難言：「汝往黑山聚落，為六群比丘作驅出羯磨。」
At that time, the World Honored One said to Ananda, "You go to the settlement of the Black Mountain to perform the expulsion procedure for the group of six monks."

爾時阿難白佛言：「我不敢去。」
At that time, Ananda said to the Buddha, "I dare not go."

佛言：「何故？」
The Buddha asked, "Why?"

阿難答言：「世尊六群比丘躁性強暴，我若往者，譬如甘蔗田人乘車載甘蔗歸，
Ananda replied, "World Honored One, the group of six monks are aggressive and unruly, if I were to go, it would be like a person carrying sugarcane back from the field,

諸童子輩逆出村外，捉甘蔗亂取就外噉食。
and the children rush out of the village to grab the sugarcane and eat it wildly on the spot.

彼六群比丘亦復如是，聞我往者，逆來道邊作非法事，
The group of six monks are just like this; upon hearing that I am coming, they will come to the roadside and commit illegal acts.

或能為我作驅出羯磨，是故難去。」
They might perform the expulsion procedure against me, which is why it is difficult to go."

佛告阿難：「汝與三十人眾俱去，足能伏彼。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "You should go with a group of thirty people, this will be enough to suppress them."

是時阿難與三十人，前後圍遶，往到黑山聚落。
At that time, Ananda, along with thirty people, surrounding him front to back, went to the settlement of the Black Mountain.

復有三十比丘，聞尊者阿難往到黑山聚落，自相謂言：「我未曾聞作驅出羯磨，
Additionally, there were thirty more monks who heard that the venerable Ananda was going to the Black Mountain settlement, and they said among themselves, "We have never heard about performing this expulsion procedure,

當隨阿難到彼聚落，聽作驅出羯磨。」
and we should follow Ananda to this settlement to witness the expulsion procedure."

并前三十人合六十比丘，大眾而去。
Together with the first thirty, a total of sixty monks joined, and the large group proceeded.

時六群比丘聞尊者阿難與六十人俱眷屬而來，為我作驅出羯磨，即生恐怖。
When the group of six monks heard that the venerable Ananda was coming with a retinue of sixty people to perform the expulsion procedure, they became terrified.

時三文陀達多、摩醯沙達多走到王道聚落。
Then, Chandaka and Mahakasyapa ran to the royal path settlement.

長老闡陀、迦留陀夷，便一由旬迎尊者阿難，即懺悔言：「長老！我所作非善，犯諸過惡，
Elder Chanda and Kaloda then set out to meet the venerable Ananda within one yojana, and repented saying, "Elder! What I have done was not good, and I have committed various transgressions and evils,

從今已去不敢復作。」
from now on, I dare not commit them again."

爾時眾僧受其懺悔。
At that time, the assembly of monks accepted their repentance.

尊者阿難前到聚落，彼二人已懺悔，二人已走去；
The venerable Ananda arrived at the settlement, and those two had already repented and departed;

餘有殘住者，為作驅出羯磨。
those remaining were subjected to the expulsion procedure.

世尊不聽眾羯磨，羯磨眾故，二人、三人為作羯磨。
The World Honored One did not allow the group expulsion procedure, so two or three people separately conducted the procedure.

羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！是某甲比丘等，於此聚落身非威儀，
Those performing the procedure should say: "Venerable Sangha, listen! These monks, in this settlement, have not behaved with dignity,

數作不止，道俗悉知。
they continuously misbehave, and everyone knows it.

若僧時到，僧當為某甲比丘等身非威儀故作驅出羯磨，如是白。」
When the time is right, the Sangha should perform the expulsion procedure because these monks do not behave with dignity, thereby declare as such."

「大德僧聽！是長老某甲比丘等身非威儀，數數不止，道俗悉知，
"Venerable Sangha listen! This elder and these monks do not behave with dignity, their continuous misconduct is known by all,

僧今為某甲比丘等作驅出羯磨。
and now the Sangha shall perform the expulsion procedure for these monks.

諸大德忍某甲比丘等身非威儀作驅出羯磨，忍者默然，若不忍者便說，
The venerable ones who tolerate the expulsion procedure for these monks due to their undignified conduct, remain silent, but those who do not tolerate it should speak out,

是初羯磨說竟。」
this concludes the statement of the first expulsion."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third expulsion procedures are stated in the same way.

「僧已與某甲比丘等身非威儀作驅出羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has performed the expulsion procedure for these monks due to their undignified conduct; since the Sangha remains silent, this matter is thus upheld."

如是口非威儀、身口非威儀亦如是；身害、口害、身口害亦如是；
Thus it is for verbal misconduct, verbal and physical misconduct, physical harm, verbal harm, and both physical and verbal harm;

身邪命、口邪命、身口邪命亦如是，說白三羯磨。
physical wrongful livelihood, verbal wrongful livelihood, and both physical and verbal wrongful livelihood are also thus, in what is called the threefold expulsion procedure.

羯磨已，是六群比丘被驅出者，語諸比丘言：
After the expulsion, those monks who were expelled, spoke to the other monks:

「闡陀比丘、迦留陀夷比丘亦行非法，何故獨驅我出而不驅彼？」
"Elder Chanda and Monk Kaloda have also acted unlawfully; why was only I expelled and they were not?"

眾僧語彼言：「是二比丘於一由旬迎僧懺悔，僧已聽悔。
The assembly of monks replied to them, "These two monks approached within one yojana to meet the Sangha and repented, and the Sangha accepted their repentance.

三文陀達多、摩醯沙達多走到王道聚落。
Chandaka and Mahakasyapa ran to the royal path settlement.

汝等現在既不迎僧懺悔又復不走，故作羯磨驅出。」
Now you neither came to meet the Sangha to repent nor did you run away, and thus, you were expelled through the procedure."

彼復作是言：「長老！僧今隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡俱共同罪，
They continued to argue, "Elder! The Sangha now acts out of affection, anger, fear, and delusion, sharing the same sin,

有驅出者、有不驅者。」
where some are expelled and some are not."

諸比丘復諫：「長老！莫以非理謗僧，僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，
The monks further advised, "Elder! Do not irrationally slander the Sangha; the Sangha does not act out of affection, anger, fear, or delusion,

不於同罪有驅出者、有不驅者。」
nor does it treat those with the same offenses differently with expulsion or non-expulsion."

諸比丘如是諫時，彼故不止。
When the monks advised in this way, they still did not stop.

復第二、第三諫，堅持不止。
They were advised a second and third time, persistently, but still did not stop.

尊者阿難為諸優婆塞，隨順說法，令其歡喜，供養眾僧還復如前。
The venerable Ananda, for the laymen, explained the teachings accordingly, making them rejoice, and the worship and support of the assembly of monks resumed as before.

尊者阿難及諸大眾欲還舍衛，
The venerable Ananda and the assembly wanted to return to Shravasti,

時諸比丘白尊者阿難：「今僧悉還，是僧伽藍與誰典知？」
and at that time the monks asked the venerable Ananda, "Now that the Sangha is returning, who will be left in charge of the vihara?"

阿難言：「誰應任知？」
Ananda replied, "Who should be responsible?"

諸比丘言：「長老闡陀應住。」
The monks said, "Elder Chanda should remain."

阿難復言：「闡陀先已有過，令他生不信，何可留住？便更安餘比丘已。」
Ananda further said, "Chanda has had mistakes before, causing others to lose trust in him, how can he be left in charge? Instead, another monk will be assigned."



尊者阿難還舍衛城，禮世尊足於一面立。
Revered Ananda returned to the city of Shravasti and stood to one side after paying homage at the feet of the Blessed One.

世尊知而故問：「阿難！汝等已於黑山聚落，作驅出羯磨耶？」
The Blessed One asked knowingly, "Ananda! Did you initiate the act of expulsion in the settlement of Black Mountain?"

答言：「已作。世尊！闡陀比丘、迦留陀夷比丘，於一由旬迎僧懺悔。
He answered, "Yes, I did, Blessed One! Venerable Chandala and Kalyana received the Sangha and repented within one yojana.

三文陀達多、摩醯沙達多，即便走到王道聚落，餘諸比丘不來懺悔，復不走去，眾僧為作驅出羯磨。
Samantrapada and Mahisha immediately went to the settlement of the royal path, while the other monks neither repented nor left, prompting the Sangha to initiate expulsion.

彼見闡陀、迦留陀夷不被驅出，便以非理謗僧言：『僧隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡，有同共犯罪，有驅出者、有不驅者。』
They saw that Chandala and Kalyana were not expelled and falsely accused the Sangha, saying the monks act on desire, anger, fear, and ignorance, committing the same offenses yet some are expelled and others are not."

佛告比丘：「是六群比丘以非理謗僧言：『隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡，有同共犯罪，有驅出者、有不驅者。』
The Buddha told the monks, "These six groups of monks falsely accuse the Sangha of acting on desire, anger, fear, and ignorance, committing the same offenses, with some being expelled and others not.

作是語者，汝當去屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫，令止此事。」
For those who speak thus, you should admonish them three times in private, three times among many, and three times in the Sangha to stop this conduct."

屏處問言：「汝等實以闡陀比丘、迦留陀夷故，非理謗僧言：『隨愛、隨瞋、隨癡、隨怖，俱共犯罪，有驅出者、有不驅者耶？』」
In private, ask them, "Did you accuse the Sangha falsely because of Chandala and Kalyana, claiming they act on desire, anger, ignorance, and fear, committing the same offenses but with some expelled and some not?"

答言：「實爾。」即屏處諫言：「長老！莫以非理謗僧。
If they reply, "Yes," then admonish them in private, saying, "Venerable ones, do not accuse the Sangha falsely.

何以故？眾僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，不於同罪，有驅出者、有不驅出者。
Why? Because the Sangha does not act on desire, anger, fear, or ignorance, nor does it expel some and not others for the same offenses.

汝等莫作隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡語言。長老！我今慈心諫汝，饒益故，當捨此事。一諫已過，二諫在。」
Do not speak with desire, anger, fear, or ignorance. Venerable ones, I now admonish you with a kind heart for your benefit. Let go of this matter. One admonition has passed, and two remain."

若不捨者，第二、第三亦如是諫。
If they do not forsake it, admonish them similarly the second and third times.

及多人中三諫，猶復不止者，僧中作求聽羯磨。
And if admonished three times among many and they still do not stop, perform an Act of Suspension within the Sangha.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是六群比丘以非理謗僧，已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫不止。
The one conducting the ceremony should say, "Great Sangha, listen! These six groups of monks falsely accused the Sangha, and have not stopped despite being admonished three times in private and three times among many.

若僧時到，當於僧中三諫，令止此事。」
If the time is right, they should be admonished three times in the Sangha to stop this matter."

即於僧中問是比丘：「汝實非理謗僧，已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫不止耶？」
Then, within the Sangha, ask these monks, "Did you falsely accuse the Sangha, and not stop after being admonished three times in private and among many?"

答言：「實爾。」僧應諫言：「長老！莫以非理謗僧。
If they reply, "Yes," the Sangha should admonish them, saying, "Venerable ones, do not falsely accuse the Sangha.

何以故？僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，不同犯罪，有驅出者、有不驅者。
Why? Because the Sangha does not act on desire, anger, fear, or ignorance, nor does it expel some and not others for the same offenses.

今僧慈心諫汝，饒益故，當捨此事。一諫已過、二諫在。」
Now, the Sangha admonishes you with a kind heart for your benefit. Let go of this matter. One admonition has passed, with two remaining."

若不止者，第二、第三亦如是諫，猶故不止。
If they do not stop, admonish similarly the second and third times, yet still they do not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣，具白世尊：「六群比丘已屏處三諫，乃至僧中三諫，猶故不止。」
The monks, for this reason, reported to the Blessed One, "The six groups of monks have been admonished three times in private, up to three times in the Sangha, yet they still do not stop."

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實非理謗僧，已屏處三諫，乃至僧中三諫，故不止耶？」
The Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here." When they had come, the Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Did you falsely accuse the Sangha and not stop after being admonished three times in private up to three times in the Sangha?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」佛告六群比丘：「此是惡事，汝不聞世尊常讚歎易諫、呵責難諫耶？
They replied, "Yes, Blessed One!" The Buddha told the six groups of monks, "This is a bad thing. Have you not heard that the Blessed One always praises those easy to admonish and criticizes those hard to admonish?"

汝今云何難諫，執持不捨？六群比丘！此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
How come you are now hard to admonish, holding on without letting go? Six groups of monks, this is not in accordance with the Dharma, not according to the vinaya, not as taught by the Buddha, and it does not nurture good conduct."



諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何此六群比丘，以闡陀、迦留陀夷不驅出故，非理謗僧？」

Some monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! Why are these six groups of monks falsely accusing the Sangha because Chanda and Kaludayi were not expelled?"

佛言：「此六群比丘不但今日以非理謗僧，過去世時已曾非理謗僧。」

The Buddha said, "These six groups of monks not only falsely accuse the Sangha today, but they have also done so in their past lives."

諸比丘言：「已曾爾耶？」

The monks asked, "Did they do so in the past?"

佛言：「曾爾。」

The Buddha replied, "Indeed they did."

「唯願欲聞。」

"We wish to hear about it."

佛言：「過去世時有城，名波羅奈，國名伽尸。

The Buddha said, "In a past life, there was a city named Varanasi in the country of Kashi.

時王家畜養二狗，以金銀鎖繫、食用寶器，夜則解放令備守門戶。

The king kept two dogs at his palace, chained with gold and silver and fed from precious vessels, and at night they were released to guard the gates.

時王得頭痛病，經十二年療治不差，後漸得差。

The king suffered from headaches for twelve years, which were not cured despite treatment, and then he gradually began to recover.

時王於眠中聞狗吠聲，王即驚覺頭痛便增。

One night, the king heard the dogs barking in his sleep, and upon waking, his headache worsened.

王問侍者：『向何等聲？』

The king asked his attendant, 'What was that sound?'

答言：『狗吠。』

The attendant replied, 'Dogs barking.'

王即瞋怒，教勅侍者：『現狗驅出。』

The king became angry and ordered the attendant, 'Expel the dogs immediately.'

即如教驅出。

The attendant carried out the orders to expel the dogs.

時有一狗問驅者言：『何故驅我？』

One of the dogs asked the expeller, 'Why are you expelling me?'

驅者答言：『王病小差，眠中聞狗吠聲，驚覺增病，是故驅汝。』

The expeller replied, 'The king's sickness slightly improved, but upon hearing the dog barking in his sleep, he awoke and his sickness worsened, so you are being expelled.'

狗復問言：『一切狗盡被驅出耶？』

The dog further asked, 'Are all the dogs being expelled?'

答言：『盡驅出。』

The expeller said, 'All are expelled.'

又問：『王家二狗亦被驅耶？』

The dog asked again, 'Are the two palace dogs also expelled?'

答言：『王家二狗不驅，餘者盡驅。』

The expeller replied, 'The two palace dogs are not expelled, only the rest are.'

狗便瞋恚言：『是王無道，隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡。』

The dog became angry and said, 'This king is unjust, acting out of desire, anger, fear, and ignorance.'

狗即說頌曰：

The dog then recited a verse:



如果狗带来麻烦，         
If dogs cause trouble, 

那么应全部赶走；         
Then they should all be driven away; 




而今不盡驅，
Now they are not driven away entirely,

知是王無道。
Knowing that the king is unprincipled.




家自養二狗，
My family raised two dogs,

不遣獨驅我；
They will not drive me away alone;




當知是惡王，
You should know this is an evil king,

隨愛瞋怖癡。
who follows love, anger, fear, and ignorance.



佛告諸比丘：「時王家狗者，今闡陀、迦留陀夷比丘是。
The Buddha told the monks, "The then royal dogs are now Chandaka and Kaludayi Bhikkhus.

餘狗者，今餘六群比丘是。
The other dogs are now the remaining six groups of bhikkhus.

爾時被驅，以二狗不驅故，非理誹謗。
At that time, they were expelled, and because the two dogs were not expelled, they were wrongly slandered.

今日被驅亦復如是，以闡陀、迦留陀夷比丘不被驅故，非理謗僧。」
Today, it is the same with the expulsion, because Chandaka and Kaludayi Bhikkhus are not expelled, the Sangha is wrongly slandered.




諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是闡陀比丘，眾人欲安處知事，而阿難不聽？」

The monks said to Buddha: "World Honored One! Why does the monk Chanda want for people to be comfortable and know things while Ananda does not agree?"

佛告諸比丘：「是闡陀比丘不但今日欲還知事，阿難不聽；過去世時已曾欲舉為王，阿難不聽。」

Buddha told the monks: "It's not just today that the monk Chanda wants people to know things and Ananda disagrees; in a past life, he also wanted to be made a king, but Ananda did not agree."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！已曾爾耶？」

The monks asked Buddha: "World Honored One! Was it really so?"

佛言：「如是。」

Buddha said: "Yes."

「唯願欲聞。」

"We wish to hear more."

佛言：「過去世時，雪山根底曲山壅中，有向陽暖處，有眾鳥類雲集其中。

Buddha said: "In a past life, at the base of a snowy mountain in the curves of hills, there was a warm sunny place where many birds gathered.

便共議言：『我等今日當推舉一鳥為王，令眾畏難不作非法。』眾鳥言：『善！誰應為王？』

They discussed among themselves: 'Today we should elect one bird as king, to make all fear difficulties and not act unlawfully.' The birds said: 'Good! Who should be king?'

有一鳥言：『當推鶬鵠。』

One bird said: 'Let's elect the crane.'

有一鳥言：『不可！何以故？高脚長頸，眾鳥脫犯啄我等腦。』

Another bird said: 'No! Why? Because of its long legs and neck, it might peck our brains.'

眾咸言：『爾。』

All the birds agreed: 'Yes.'

復有一鳥言：『當推鵝為王，其色絕白眾鳥所敬。』

Another bird said: 'Let's elect the goose as king, for its pure white color is revered by many birds.'

眾鳥復言：『此亦不可！顏貌雖白項長且曲，自頸不直，安能正他？』

Again, the birds said: 'This bird is also not suitable! Although its appearance is white, its neck is long and curved, it can't even straighten its own neck, how can it lead others?'

又復言：『正有孔雀，毛衣彩飾，觀者悅目，可應為王。』

Then they suggested: 'The peacock is richly decorated with colorful feathers, pleasing to the eye, it should be king.'

復言：『不可！所以者何？衣毛雖好而無慚愧，每至舞時醜形出現，是故不可。』

Again, they said: 'No! Why? Although its feathers are beautiful, it has no shame, and every time it dances, its ugly form appears, so it shouldn't be king.'

有一鳥言：『禿梟應為王。所以者何？晝則安靜、夜則勤伺，守護我等，堪為王者。』

A bird said: 'The owl should be king. Why? It is peaceful during the day and vigilant at night, protecting us, suitable as a king.'

眾咸言：『可。』

All the birds said: 'Agreed.'

爾時有一鸚鵡鳥，在一處住，有智慧，作是念：『眾鳥之法夜應眠息；是禿梟法夜則不眠。

At that time, there was a parrot living in one place, possessing wisdom, thinking: 'The law for birds is to rest at night; but the owl stays awake at night.

而諸眾鳥圍侍左右，晝夜警宿不得眠睡，甚為苦事。

And all the birds serving as entourage couldn't sleep day and night, which is very distressing.

我今設語，彼當瞋恚拔我毛羽。』

If I speak now, they might get angry and pluck my feathers.'

正欲不言，『眾鳥之類長夜受困，寧受拔毛不越正理。』

Just when I wanted to remain silent, 'The birds have suffered long nights; better to have feathers plucked than to go against reason.'

便到眾鳥前，舉翅恭敬，白眾鳥言：『願聽我說一偈。』

He went before the birds, raised his wings respectfully, and said: 'Please hear me recite a verse.'

時眾鳥即說偈答言：

At that moment, the birds responded by reciting a verse:



『黠慧廣知義，
The wise and knowledgeable,

不必以年耆；
not necessarily because of old age;



汝年雖幼小，
Though you are young in age,

智者宜時說。
The wise ones should speak at the right time.




時鸚鵡聞眾鳥說偈，

At that time, the parrot heard the other birds reciting a verse,

聽已即說偈言：

and after listening, it immediately recited the verse, saying:



若從我意者，
If you follow my will,

不用禿梟王；
There is no need for a bald and fierce king;




歡喜時覩面，  
When happy, see its face,

尚令眾鳥怖。  
Yet it frightens all the birds.  




況復瞋恚時，  
How much more when he is angry?

其面不可觀。  
His face is hard to look at.  




「時眾鳥咸言：『實如所說。』

At that time, all the birds said, "It is indeed as stated."

即共集議：『此鸚鵡鳥聰明黠慧，堪應為王。』

Then they gathered to discuss: "This parrot is intelligent and wise, fit to be king."

便拜為王。」

Then they acclaimed it as the king."

佛告諸比丘：「彼時禿梟者，今闡陀比丘是。

The Buddha said to the monks: "The bald owl then is now Chanda Bhikkhu.

鸚鵡鳥者，今阿難是。

The parrot is now Ananda.

彼於爾時已曾遮彼，不聽為王；今復遮彼，不聽知事。」

At that time, he had already prohibited him from becoming king; now he is again prevented from knowing the duties."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "All monks residing in Savatthi city should gather, so that even those who have heard before should hear again.

有諸比丘依止城、若聚落住，污他家、行惡行，污他家亦見亦聞，行惡行亦見亦聞。

There are monks residing in cities or villages who defile others' homes and commit evil deeds, these actions are both seen and heard.

諸比丘應語是比丘言：『長老！汝等污他家、行惡行，污他家亦見亦聞，行惡行亦見亦聞。

The monks should say to these monks: 'Elder, you defile others' homes and commit evil deeds, both of which are seen and heard.

長老！汝等出去，不應是中住。』

Elder, you should leave and not reside here."

是比丘語諸比丘言：『大德！僧隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡。

These monks reply to the monks saying: 'Elder, the Sangha is governed by love, anger, fear, and delusion.

何以故？有如是同罪比丘，有驅者、有不驅者。』

Why is this? There are monks with the same offenses, some are expelled, and some are not."

諸比丘應語是比丘言：『長老！汝等莫作是語「僧隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡，有如是同罪比丘有驅者、有不驅者。」

The monks should say to these monks: 'Elder, do not speak like this, "The Sangha is governed by love, anger, fear, and delusion, with monks of the same offenses, some are expelled and some are not."

何以故？僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡。

Why is this? The Sangha is not governed by love, anger, fear, or delusion.

諸長老！汝等污他家、行惡行，污他家亦見亦聞，行惡行亦見亦聞，汝等出去，莫此中住。』

Elders, you defile others' homes and commit evil deeds, both of which are seen and heard, you should leave and not reside here."

是比丘諸比丘如是諫時，若堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘應第二、第三諫，捨是事故。

When these monks are admonished by the other monks in this way, if they persist and do not renounce, the monks should admonish a second and third time to abandon it.

第二、第三諫時，捨者善；若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」

During the second and third admonishments, if they renounce, it is good; if not, it is a Sanghadisesa offense."



諸比丘者，若僧、若多人、若一人。
Monks, be it a community, many people, or one person.




依止城、若聚落住者，云何依止聚落住？
If living depends on a city or village, what does it mean to live relying on a village? 

若比丘於彼聚落中得衣被、飲食、床臥、病瘦湯藥等，是名依止住。
If a monk obtains clothing, food, bedding, medicine, etc., in that village, it is called residing by reliance. 

若復不得衣食、床臥、病瘦湯藥等，但依止聚落，得免諸難，亦名依止住。
If one does not get clothing, food, bedding, medicine, etc., but only relies on the village to avoid all difficulties, it is also called residing by reliance. 

若復比丘不依聚落免難，但依止聚落界住者，亦名依止住。
If a monk does not rely on the village to avoid difficulties but only resides within the village boundary, it is still called residing by reliance. 




污他家者，他家名若剎利家、婆羅門家、若毘舍家、首陀羅家，是名他家。
To defile someone's family means the family of Kshatriya, Brahmin, Vaishya, or Shudra, these are called families.

污者，若比丘於聚落中作非梵行、飲酒、非時食，是不名污他家。
To defile means if a monk engages in unbecoming conduct, drinks alcohol, or eats at improper times in the village, it is not considered defiling someone else's family.

若聚落中人先有信心供養眾僧、興立塔寺，令彼退滅，是名污他家。
If the people in the village initially have faith and make offerings to the monks, build stupas and temples, and then cause their decline, it is called defiling someone else's family.




行惡行者，身非威儀、

Those who commit evil deeds have no dignity in their actions,

口非威儀、

No dignity in their speech,

身口非威儀、

No dignity in both actions and speech,

身暴害、

Their actions are violent,

口暴害、

Their speech is harmful,

身口暴害、

Both actions and speech are violent,

身邪命、

Their actions are unrighteous,

口邪命、

Their speech is unrighteous,

身口邪命。

Both their actions and speech are unrighteous.



污他家行惡行亦見亦聞者，

Those who defile the household and commit evil deeds are also seen and heard,

作諸惡行，

committing all sorts of evil acts,

聚落中人亦見亦聞。

the people of the community also see and hear them.




諸比丘語是比丘言：「長老！汝等污他家、行惡行，污他家亦見亦聞，行惡行亦見亦聞，莫此中住。」
The monks spoke to this monk, saying: "Elder! You have defiled the household and engaged in misconduct, which is both seen and heard. Do not remain here."

是比丘作是言：「諸長老！僧隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡，有同罪比丘，有驅者、有不驅者。」
The monk said: "Elders! The Sangha is biased by desire, anger, fear, and ignorance. There are monks with the same offenses; some are expelled, while others are not."

諸比丘復語是比丘言：「長老！莫作是語，僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，汝捨是事。」
The monks again spoke to this monk, saying: "Elder! Do not speak this way. The Sangha is not biased by desire, anger, fear, or ignorance. Abandon this matter."



是比丘故堅持不捨，

Because the bhikkhu persisted and did not give up,

非理謗僧者，

those who slander the sangha without reason

六群比丘是也。

are the group of six bhikkhus.




諸比丘者，若僧、若眾多人、若一人。

Those who are monks, either the community, many people, or one person.




三諫者，屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫也。
There are three types of admonishments: in private, among many, and among monks.

屏處諫者，屏處問言：「汝長老！實以非理謗僧言：『隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡，有同罪比丘，有驅者、有不驅者耶？』」
For a private admonishment, ask in private: "Elder! You have indeed unjustly slandered the monks by saying: 'With attachment, anger, fear, and delusion, are there monks who have committed the same offense, some expelled and some not?'

答言：「實爾。」
The reply is: "Indeed."

即復呵言：「長老！莫作是語，非理謗僧。何以故？僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，不於同罪中有驅者、有不驅者。
Then say again: "Elder! Do not speak thus, unjustly slandering the monks. Why? Because the monks are not driven by attachment, anger, fear, and delusion, and do not expel some for the same offense while retaining others.

我今慈心諫汝，饒益故，當止此事，一諫已過二諫在。」
I now admonish you out of kindness, for your benefit, to stop this matter; one admonishment has passed, the second remains."

若不止者，復第二、第三諫。
If you do not stop, then follow with a second and a third admonishment.

多人中三諫，猶故不止者，僧中作求聽羯磨。
Among many, if three admonishments are given and you still do not stop, perform a formal act of reprimand within the sangha.

唱言：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘非理謗僧，已於屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止。
Announce: "Venerable Sangha, listen! A certain monk has unjustly slandered the monks, has been admonished three times in private and three times among many, but still does not stop.

若僧時到，今於僧中三諫，令止是事。」
If the time has come for the sangha, now among the monks, admonish thrice more to stop this matter."

僧中應問：「長老！汝實非理謗僧，作是語：『僧隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡。』
Among the monks, they should ask: "Elder! Have you indeed unjustly slandered the monks, saying: 'The monks act with attachment, anger, fear, and delusion?'

乃至屏處三諫、多人中三諫，猶故不止耶？」
Even after three private and three group admonishments, do you still not stop?"

答言：「實爾。」
The response is: "Indeed."

僧應諫言：「長老！汝莫非理謗僧。何以故？
The monks should admonish: "Elder! Do not unjustly slander the monks. Why?

僧不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡，不於同罪，有驅者、有不驅者。
Because the monks do not act with attachment, anger, fear, and delusion, nor do they expel some with the same offense and not others.

今眾僧慈心諫汝，饒益故，一諫已過，二諫在，當捨此事。」
The sangha now admonishes you with kindness, for your benefit, one admonishment has passed, the second remains, you should abandon this matter."

若不捨者，應第二、第三諫，捨者善；若不捨，僧伽婆尸沙。
If not abandoned, give a second or third admonishment. Abandoning is good; if not, it becomes an offense requiring expiation (Sanghadisesa).



僧伽婆尸沙者，如上說。
The punishment for sanghādisesa, as stated above.




是比丘屏處諫時，三諫不止，諫諫越比尼罪。
When a monk advises in private three times without stopping, it leads to a minor infraction.

多人中三諫，亦復如是。
Advising three times among many people is also the same.

僧中初說未竟，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。
In the assembly, if one speaks before finishing thrice, it's a minor infraction; if finished, it's a serious infraction.

第二說未竟，越比尼罪；說竟，偷蘭罪。
For the second speech, unfinished is a minor infraction; finished is a serious infraction.

第三說未竟，偷蘭罪；說竟，僧伽婆尸沙。
On the third speech, unfinished is a serious infraction; finished is a monastic offense.

僧伽婆尸沙起已，除四偷蘭罪非理謗僧，
Upon arising this monastic offense, excluding four serious infractions of slandering the Sangha,

諸餘屏處三諫、多人中三諫、僧中三諫，
and the other advices in private, among many people, in the assembly,

一切越比尼罪、一切偷蘭罪，都合成一僧伽婆尸沙。
all minor and serious infractions together become one monastic offense.

中間止者，隨止處治罪。
For those stopping in between, deal with offenses according to where they stop.

是故說：「有諸比丘依止城、若聚落住，
Therefore, it is said: "When monks reside in a city or village,

乃至第二、第三諫時，捨者善；若不捨者，僧伽婆尸沙。」
up to the second or third advice, it is good to give up; if not, it’s an offense.

(十三戒竟)
(End of the thirteenth precept)



二不定法初
The beginning of the two indefinite laws




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, and spoke extensively as above.

爾時長老優陀夷同聚落舊知識婆羅門有一女，新到夫家，愁憂不樂，遣信白父：「願來看我，若不能得來者，語阿闍梨優陀夷來看我。」

At that time, Elder Udayin was acquainted with a Brahmin family in the community. The Brahmin's daughter, newly married, was unhappy and sent a message to her father: "Please come to see me, and if you cannot come, ask Acharya Udayin to visit."

其父聞已，詣優陀夷所語言：「我女新到夫家，愁憂不樂，遣信喚我，并喚阿闍梨。我今俗人多事不能得往，願阿闍梨數數往看。」

Upon hearing this, her father went to Udayin and said: "My daughter, newly married, is unhappy and has sent for me and the Acharya. I am a layperson with many obligations and cannot go; I wish for the Acharya to visit frequently."

優陀夷言：「可爾！汝不囑我尚欲往看，何況相囑。」

Udayin said: "Alright! I intended to visit her even without your request, let alone with it."

長老優陀夷明日晨朝著入聚落衣，往到其家。

The next morning, Elder Udayin donned his village entry robe and went to her home.

時彼女人掩戶而坐。

At that time, the woman was sitting with the door closed.

優陀夷在外喚言：「某甲在不？」

Udayin called from outside: "Is someone there?"

女言：「是誰？」

The woman asked: "Who is it?"

答言：「我是優陀夷！」

He answered: "I am Udayin!"

女言：「阿闍梨來入！阿闍梨來入！」

The woman said: "Acharya, please come in! Acharya, please come in!"

即入其房。於房內坐，與共語言。

He entered the room, sat, and they conversed.

時姑毘舍佉鹿母，有三十二子，亦有三十二兒，婦皆悉福德吉相成就。

At that time, Lady Visakha, the Lady of Deer, had thirty-two sons, and her daughters-in-law were all fortunate and blessed.

是時毘舍佉鹿母常教誡兒子諸婦，勸導父母親屬，次到是女房前。

Lady Visakha often admonished her sons and daughters-in-law, guiding relatives and parents, and then arrived in front of this woman's room.

是毘舍佉鹿母，善解時宜不卒入房，踟蹰戶外。

Lady Visakha, understanding propriety, did not abruptly enter the room and hesitated outside the door.

戶孔中見房內有人剃髮著染衣，睩瞬細語，知是出家人。

Through a gap in the door, she saw someone in the room with shaven hair and dyed clothes, speaking softly, and knew it was a renunciant.

但不知是比丘，為是比丘尼，便喚此婦。

But she did not know if it was a monk or a nun, so she called out to the woman.

婦應曰：「是誰？」

The woman responded: "Who is it?"

答言：「是我。」

She answered: "It is I."

白言：「大家來前。」

The woman said: "Please come forward."

問：「汝邊是誰婦？」

She asked: "Who is by your side?"

答言：「阿闍梨優陀夷！」

She answered: "Acharya Udayin!"

優陀夷言：「優婆夷，何以不前？」

Udayin said: "Laywoman, why do you not come forward?"

鹿母即入而作是言：「阿闍梨優陀夷！此間坐耶？」

Lady Visakha entered and said: "Acharya Udayin! Are you sitting here?"

答言：「如是。」

He answered: "Yes."

白言：「阿闍梨此坐非明白處，設有善惡誰證知者？」

The woman said: "Acharya, this place is not proper; if something good or bad happens, who can testify?"

當以此事，語諸比丘。

This matter should be told to the other monks.

優陀夷言：「汝說何等？」

Udayin said: "What are you saying?"

毘舍佉鹿母言：「見優陀夷與女人共坐。」

Lady Visakha said: "I see Udayin sitting together with a woman."

優陀夷言：「我亦當向佛說汝。」

Udayin said: "I will also tell the Buddha about you."

毘舍佉鹿母言：「欲說何等？」

Lady Visakha said: "What would you say?"

優陀夷言：「我見毘舍佉鹿母，與他男子共坐。」

Udayin said: "I see Lady Visakha sitting with another man."

毘舍佉鹿母言：「何等男子？」

Lady Visakha said: "What man?"

優陀夷言：「我非男子耶？」

Udayin said: "Am I not a man?"

毘舍佉鹿母言：「阿闍梨！佛不制我不與男子共坐，然阿闍梨是出家人，應護沙門法。」

Lady Visakha said: "Acharya! The Buddha does not prohibit me from sitting with a man, but an acharya is a renunciant and should protect monastic law."

優陀夷言：「咄哉！汝惱我不少。」

Udayin said: "Alas! You trouble me much."

便起出去，復在一露處，與女人共坐。

He then got up and went outside, to an open place, and sat with the woman again.

毘舍佉鹿母教誡兒婦已出，復見優陀夷與女人露處共坐語，往到其邊，語優陀夷言：「此是不善，非沙門法。云何與女人露處共坐？」

Lady Visakha, after admonishing her daughters-in-law and exiting, saw Udayin with the woman, sitting in open conversation, and went to him, saying: "This is not good, not monastic law. How can you sit and converse with a woman in the open?"

當以是事語諸比丘。

This should be reported to the other monks.

優陀夷言：「何所說？」

Udayin said: "What are you saying?"

毘舍佉鹿母言：「見優陀夷獨與女人露處共坐。」

Lady Visakha said: "I see Udayin sitting alone with a woman in the open."

語優陀夷言：「我亦當向佛說汝事。」

She said to Udayin: "I will also report your matter to the Buddha."

毘舍佉鹿母言：「為何所說？」

Lady Visakha said: "What would you say?"

優陀夷言：「我見鹿母與男子露處共坐語。」

Udayin said: "I see Lady Visakha with a man in the open conversing."

毘舍佉鹿母言：「何等男子？」

Lady Visakha said: "What kind of man?"

答言：「我非男子耶？」

He replied: "Am I not a man?"

毘舍佉母言：「我是俗人共男子坐，佛法所聽。尊是沙門應自防護，云何爾耶？」

Lady Visakha said: "I am a layperson allowed by the Dharma to sit with a man. You, as a renunciant, should self-guard; why do you act this way?"

優陀夷言：「汝處處惱我。」

Udayin said: "You trouble me everywhere."

作是語已，即便起去。

Saying this, he immediately got up and left.

時毘舍佉母即以是事白諸比丘，諸比丘以是事，具白世尊，佛言：「喚優陀夷來。」

Lady Visakha then reported this matter to the monks, who in turn fully reported it to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said: "Call Udayin here."

即便喚來。

He was immediately called.

佛問優陀夷：「汝實爾不？」

The Buddha asked Udayin: "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He answered: "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛告優陀夷：「此是惡事。汝愚癡人！俗人尚知出家宜法應行不應行。

The Buddha told Udayin: "This is a bad deed. You foolish person! Even laypeople know what renunciants should and should not do.

汝出家人而更不知坐起言語，應與不應與。

As a renunciant, you do not know when to sit or rise, or what to speak and whom to associate with.

汝常不聞世尊種種因緣，呵責隨順婬欲，讚歎離欲耶？

Have you not often heard the Blessed One speak various reasons for criticizing lust and praising detachment?

汝今云何作此惡事？

How can you now do such a bad deed?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

This is not Dharma, not discipline, not according to the Buddha's teaching, and it cannot cultivate good qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集。」

The Buddha told the monks: "Gather all the monks in the vicinity of Shravasti."

集已，爾時世尊以是因緣，向諸比丘廣說過患事，起種種因緣，呵責過患。

Once gathered, the Blessed One, due to this incident, extensively explained the dangers to the monks, raising various reasons for criticizing the faults.

起已為諸比丘隨順說法：「有十事利益故，如來應供正遍知為諸弟子制戒，立說波羅提木叉法。

Afterward, for the monks, he spoke Dharma in accordance: "For ten beneficial reasons, the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Supremely Enlightened One, establishes precepts and proclaims the Prajnaparamita code for the discipline of disciples.

何等十？

Which ten?

一者攝僧故；二者極攝僧故；三者令僧安樂故；

First, for the regulation of the Sangha; second, for the utmost regulation of the Sangha; third, for the comfort of the Sangha;

四者折伏無羞人故；

Fourth, to curb shameless people;

五者有慚愧者得安樂住故；

Fifth, to enable those with a sense of shame to live at ease;

六者不信者令信故；

Sixth, to inspire faith in those without faith;

七者已信者增益信故；

Seventh, to increase the faith of those already faithful;

八者於現法中得漏盡故；

Eighth, to enable the ending of defilements in the present life;

九者未生諸漏令不生故；

Ninth, so that unarisen defilements do not arise;

十者正法得久住為諸天世人開甘露施門故，是名十。

Tenth, so that the true Dharma endures long, opening the door of ambrosia for celestial beings and humans; these are the ten.

如來、應供、正遍知為諸弟子制戒，未聞者聞，已聞者當重聞。

The Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Supremely Enlightened One lays down precepts for the disciples, which those who haven't heard, will hear, and those who have heard will hear again.

若比丘與女人獨屏覆處、可婬處坐，可信優婆夷於三法中一一法說，若波羅夷、若僧伽婆尸沙、若波夜提。

If a monk sits in a secluded or promiscuous place with a woman, and a trustworthy laywoman reports any of the three offenses—Parajika, Sanghadisesa, or Pacittiya;

比丘自言：『我坐是處。』

The monk claims: 'I sat there.'

三法中一一如法治，若波羅夷、若僧伽婆尸沙、若波夜提，應隨可信優婆夷所說，如法治。」

Any of the three offenses shall be dealt with accordingly—Parajika, Sanghadisesa, or Pacittiya, following what a trustworthy laywoman reports is to be corrected lawfully."

彼比丘是初不定法。

This monk committed the initial indefinite offense.



若比丘與女人獨露現處、不可婬處坐，可信優婆夷，於二法中一一法說，若僧伽婆尸沙、若波夜提。
If a monk is alone with a woman in a secluded place, he should not sit in a suspicious place, a trustworthy female lay follower can say whether the offense is saṅghādisesa or pācittiya.

比丘自言：『我坐是處。』
The monk himself says, "I was sitting here."

二法中一一如法治，若僧伽婆尸沙、若波夜提，應隨可信優婆夷所說，如法治。
In each of the two matters, according to the rule, whether it involves saṅghādisesa or pācittiya, it should be handled according to what the trustworthy female lay follower says.

彼比丘是二不定法。
These are the two indefinite rules for the monk.



比丘者，受具足善受具足，

A bhikkhu, who is fully ordained,

一白三羯磨，無遮法，

through a motion and three proclamations, an unblocked procedure,

和合非不和合，

harmoniously and not disharmoniously,

十眾、十眾已上，

in a community of ten or more,

年滿二十非不滿二十，

being twenty years old and not below twenty,

是名比丘。

is called a bhikkhu.




女人者，若母、姊妹、親里、非親里；若老、若少、在家、出家。

Women, whether mothers, sisters, relatives, or non-relatives; whether old or young, at home or away from home.




覆蓋的東西，比如陰暗處、受遮擋之處。
Things that are covered, like dark places or obscured areas.




可淫处者，男女共事无可羞处。  
Those who can engage in debauchery find no shame in the joint affairs of men and women.




獨者，一男一女，更無餘人。
Alone, a man and a woman, with no one else.

設有餘人，若眠、若狂、若嬰兒、非人、畜生，亦名獨。
If there are others, such as those asleep, mad, infants, non-humans, or animals, it is also called alone.




共坐者，相近坐。
Those who sit together, sit closely.




可信優婆夷者，成就十六法，名可信優婆夷。

A trustworthy female lay devotee accomplishes sixteen practices and is called trustworthy.

何等十六？

What are these sixteen?

歸佛、歸法、歸僧、

She takes refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.

於佛不壞淨、於法不壞淨、於僧不壞淨、

She has unshakable purity in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.

僧未得利能令得，

She helps those in the Sangha who haven't yet obtained benefits to gain them.

已得利能令增長、

She helps those in the Sangha who have obtained benefits to increase them.

僧未有名稱能令名聞遠著、

She helps the Sangha gain a positive reputation even from afar.

僧有惡名能速令滅、

She can quickly extinguish any bad reputation of the Sangha.

不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡、

She does not follow desire, hatred, fear, or ignorance.

離欲、

She is free from desire.

向成就聖戒，

She is directed towards the accomplishment of sacred precepts.

是十六法成就者，是名可信。

One who accomplishes these sixteen practices is called trustworthy.




是比丘自言：「知事，不知坐。」

The monk said, "I know the matters, but do not know how to sit."

應治是事。

This should be addressed.

若言：「知坐，不知事。」

If he says, "I know how to sit, but do not know the matters."

應治坐。

This should address the sitting.

若言：「知事知坐。」

If he says, "I know the matters and know how to sit."

應二俱治。

Both should be addressed.

若言：「不知事不知坐」者，

If he says, "I do not know the matters nor do I know how to sit,"

應如優婆夷所說，

It should be as the laywoman said,

應作覓罪相羯磨治。

A search for the faults should be conducted and addressed.



比丘者，如上說。  
Bhikshu, as mentioned above.




女人者

Women,

若母、姊妹、

whether mothers or sisters,

若大、若小、

whether elder or younger,

在家、

whether at home,

出家。

or away from home.



單獨的人，一男一女，沒有其他人。
Alone, one man and one woman, without anyone else.

如果有人的話，或者睡眠、或者瘋狂、嬰兒、非人、畜生，這也稱為單獨。
If there is anyone, whether sleeping, mad, an infant, non-human, or beast, this is also called alone.




露現處者，明中露地，無諸屏障，是名露現處。
The revealed place is a clear open space without any barriers, known as the revealed place.




不可淫处者

The place that should not be defiled

若男女共事可羞耻处。

If men and women work together, it could be a place of shame.




坐着，相近坐也。

Sit down, it's close sitting.



可信优婆夷者，成就十六法，如上说，是名可信也。
As for the trustworthy Upāsikā, she has accomplished the sixteen qualities as mentioned above, thus she is called trustworthy.




：「知事不知坐。」

The monk himself says, "I understand the matter but not the seating."

應治是事。

This matter should be resolved.

若言：「知坐不知事。」

If he says, "I understand the seating but not the matter."

應治是坐。

This seating should be resolved.

若言：「知事、知坐。」

If he says, "I understand both the matter and the seating."

應二俱治。

Both should be resolved.

若言：「不知事亦不知坐」者，

If he says, "I understand neither the matter nor the seating,"

應如可信優婆夷所說，應作覓罪相羯磨治。

It should be handled according to the trustworthy laywoman's words, performing the penance for seeking faults.

是故說：「若比丘與一女人獨屏覆處、可婬處坐，

Thus it is said: "If a monk sits with a woman in a secluded, concealed place fit for lewd conduct,

乃至可信優婆夷所說，

even as the trustworthy laywoman says,

如法治彼比丘，

the monk should be dealt with according to the law,

是初不定法。

this is the first indefinite rule.

若比丘與女人獨露現處、不可婬處坐，

If a monk sits with a woman in an exposed, public place unfit for lewd conduct,

乃至可信優婆夷所說，

even as the trustworthy laywoman says,

如法治彼比丘，

the monk should be dealt with according to the law,

是二不定法。」(二不定竟)

this is the second indefinite rule." (End of the two indefinite rules


摩訶僧祇律卷第七  
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll 7




