inly! Please provide me with the lines you want translated, and I'll format the translations as specified


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
[Scripture Information] Taisho Revised Tripitaka, Volume 22, No. 1425, Maha-Sangha Vinaya




版本记录: 2024年8月发布，最后更新：2024年7月12日

Version Record: Released in August 2024, last updated on July 12, 2024




本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯  
This database was edited by the CBETA Foundation based on the "Taisho Revised Tripitaka"




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，伽耶山基金會提供，北美某大德提供，釋本禪法師提供新式標點

[Original Data] Provided by Venerable Xiao Zhenguo, Gaya Mountain Foundation, a North American Venerable, and Master Shi Benchan providing new punctuation.




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Matters] This database may circulate freely and without charge. Please refer to the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration for details.




 please provide the lines you want me to translate


摩訶僧祇律卷第八  
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume Eight  




東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯  
During the Eastern Jin dynasty, the Tripitaka Master Buddhayaśas and Faxian translated.  




明三十尼薩耆波夜提法之初
The beginning of the precept on the thirtieth clear night of the month




佛在毘舍離大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。

The Buddha was at the Great Grove in Vāśālī in the Jeweled Park Monastery, speaking extensively as above.

爾時長老難陀、優波難陀遊諸聚落，多得衣物滿車載來。

At that time, the Elders Nanda and Upananda traveled among the settlements and acquired so many clothes that their carts were full.

爾時世尊晨朝時聞重車聲，知而故問諸比丘：「何等車聲？」

At that time, the World-Honored One heard the sound of heavy carts in the morning and knowingly asked the monks, "What noise is this from the carts?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！是長老難陀、優波難陀，遊諸聚落多得衣物滿車載來，是彼車聲。」

The monks replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! It is Elders Nanda and Upananda, who traveled among settlements and acquired many clothes to fill the carts; this is the sound from the carts."

世尊即時便作是念：「我諸弟子乃爾多求衣物。」

The World-Honored One immediately thought, "My disciples seek so much clothing."

後於一時冬中八夜大寒雨雪，時世尊初夜著一衣，在有覺有觀三昧。

Later, during a time when there were eight nights of great cold with rain and snow in winter, the World-Honored One wore one garment in the first part of the night and entered a state of meditation with perception and contemplation.

至中夜時，覺身小冷，復著第二衣。

By midnight, feeling slightly cold, he put on a second garment.

至後夜時，復覺身冷，著第三衣，便作是念：「我諸弟子齊是三衣，足遮大寒大熱、防諸蚊虻，覆障慚愧、不壞聖種。」

By the latter part of the night, feeling cold again, he donned a third garment and thought, "My disciples with only three garments can sufficiently protect against extreme cold and heat, prevent insect bites, cover shame, and not damage the sacred lineage."

若性不堪寒者，聽弊故衣，隨意重納。

If one's nature cannot endure the cold, they are permitted to use an old unsuitable cloth, layering as they wish.

於是世尊夜過晨朝，詣眾多比丘所，敷尼師檀坐。

Thus, as night gave way to morning, the World-Honored One went to where many monks were gathered and sat on a prepared seat.

語諸比丘：「我一時晨朝聞重車聲，問諸比丘：『何等車聲？』

He addressed the monks, "Once in the morning, I heard the sound of heavy carts and asked the monks, 'What noise is this from the carts?'

諸比丘言：『長老難陀、優波難陀，遊諸聚落多得衣物，是彼車聲。』

The monks said, 'It is Elders Nanda and Upananda, who traveled among settlements acquiring many clothes; this is the sound from the carts.'

我作是念：『我諸弟子多求衣物，廣生樂著。』

I thought, 'My disciples seek so much clothing, creating extensive attachment and enjoyment.'

我復一時冬中八夜，乃至重著三衣，便作是念：『我諸弟子齊此三衣，足止大寒大熱、防諸蚊虻，覆障慚愧、不壞聖種。』

Once, during a winter period of eight nights, I wore three garments and thought, 'My disciples with just these three garments can sufficiently withstand the great cold and heat, prevent insect bites, cover shame, and not harm the sacred lineage.'

我從今日聽諸比丘齊畜三衣。

From today, I allow all monks to possess and maintain three garments.

若得新者，兩重作僧伽梨，一重作欝多羅僧，一重作安陀會。

If obtaining new ones, two layers should be made into a sanghati, one layer into an uttarasaṅga, and one layer into an antarvāsa.

若性不堪寒者，聽弊故衣，隨意重納。」

If one's nature cannot endure the cold, they are permitted to use an old unsuitable cloth, layering as they wish."



復次佛住毘舍離，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed at Vaishali and spoke extensively as mentioned above.

時一聚落中有三摩訶羅比丘共住。
At that time, in a village, there were three Mahara monks living together.

一摩訶羅死，有多衣物，而不知分。
One Mahara died, leaving many clothes and items, and they didn't know how to divide them.

一比丘言：「我須僧伽梨。」
One monk said, "I need a samghati robe."

第二復言：「我亦須之。」
The second monk also said, "I need it too."

如是一一物皆競欲得，不能斷當。
Thus, each item was contested over, but they couldn't decide.

爾時優波難陀遊諸聚落，過彼住處，
At that time, Upananda was traveling through various villages and passed by their residence.

是摩訶羅等遙見彼來，便作是念：
The Maharas saw him coming from afar and thought,

「是釋種子端正姝好，佛種出家，當為我等止此諍事。」
"He is a noble Shakya, handsome and from the Buddha's lineage, and should settle this dispute for us."

即便白言：「我此住處有諸衣物，各競欲取不能得分。
So they said, "In our residence, there are various items that each of us wants to take, but we cannot divide them.

尊者今日為我止此諍事，得分衣物。」
Today, may the Venerable help us resolve this dispute and divide the items."

優波難陀答言：「我今為汝分物，多起怨嫌。」
Upananda replied, "If I divide the items for you now, it will cause much resentment."

摩訶羅言：「不為我分者，誰當分之？
The Mahara said, "If you don't divide for us, who will?

我等寧可詣諸外道求分物耶？」
Should we go to outsiders to seek division of the items?"

優波難陀復言：「當先作要，隨我語者我當為分。」
Upananda further replied, "First, make an agreement. Whoever follows my words, I will divide for them."

答言：「從教。」
They answered, "We will follow your instructions."

語言：「盡出物來。」
He said, "Bring out all the items."

即便出之，隨為分作三分。
They immediately brought them out and divided them into three parts.

時摩訶羅作是念：
The Mahara thought,

「我正有二人而作三分，彼故當欲取一分耶？
"We are only two, and he made three parts; does he intend to take one part himself?

寧使取一分，且止我諍。」
Let him take one part and stop our dispute for now."

分為三分已，復問摩訶羅言：
After dividing into three parts, Upananda asked the Mahara,

「物盡出來，莫使後復致諍。
"Are all the items out? Do not cause any further disputes.

有不欲出者，第二人復持來出。」
If there are any items left, let the second person bring them out."

答言：「已盡。」
They replied, "It's all out."

時優波難陀在二分中間立，
At that time, Upananda stood between the two parts,

二摩訶羅中間著一分。
and placed one part between the two Mahara.

作是言：「汝等聽我說羯磨。」
He said, "Listen to me as I conduct the karma."

答言：「爾。」
They replied, "Yes."

便作是言：「是二分并我，如是我有三；
He said, "These two parts plus me, so I have three;

汝二共一，如是汝有三。
You two share one part, so you have three.

是三彼三，二三平等不？」
These three and those three, aren't two threes equal?"

是摩訶羅已先作要，又復畏難釋種子故，
The Mahara already made an agreement and, fearing the noble Shakya,

不敢復言。
didn't dare to speak further.

是二摩訶羅共得一分，故不知分。
The two Mahara ended up with one part and couldn't understand the division.

復白言：「長老！我今此分當云何分？」
They said again, "Elder! How should we divide this one part now?"

爾時優波難陀即與分作二分，
Then Upananda divided it into two parts,

摩訶羅便各持去。
and the Mahara each took one away.



爾時諸比丘以是因緣，往白佛言：「云何，世尊！是優波難陀欺彼摩訶羅比丘？」

At that time, the monks, because of this incident, went to the Buddha and said, "World-Honored One, how did Upananda deceive Mahakara Bhikkhu?"

佛語諸比丘：「是優波難陀不但今日欺彼比丘，過去世時已曾欺彼。」

The Buddha said to the monks, "Upananda not only deceives the monk today, but in past lives, he has also deceived him."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」

The monks said to the Buddha, "Has this happened before?"

答言：「曾爾！過去世時，南方國土有無垢河，河中有二水獺：一者能入深，二者入淺。」

The Buddha replied, "Yes, it has! In past lives, there was a spotless river in the southern country, where there were two otters: one could go deep, the other stayed shallow."

時入深水者，捕得一鯉魚，如《生經》中廣說。」

At that time, the one who went into the deep water caught a carp, as extensively described in the Jataka tales.




復次佛在毘舍離，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was in Vesāli, explaining as above.

有五事利益故，如來五日一行諸比丘房。
For the benefit of five things, the Tathagata visited the monks' quarters every five days.

爾時世尊遍行諸房，至難陀房中，見其房內多畜衣物。
At that time, the World-Honored One walked through various rooms and, upon reaching Nanda's room, saw many garments and possessions stored there.

有桁曬衣物者、有縫衣者、染衣者、打衣者、作淨者。
There were those who were airing clothes on racks, those who were sewing, dyeing, beating clothes, and cleaning them.

難陀如是分處，喻如欲作大會布施一切僧物。
Nanda organized things in this way, as if preparing for a grand offering of all the monks' items.

時世尊知而故問難陀：「是誰衣物？」
Then, the World-Honored One knowingly asked Nanda, "Whose belongings are these?"

答言：「我許。」
He answered, "They are mine, permitted by me."

佛言：「比丘！此衣太多。」
The Buddha said, "Monk! These clothes are too many."

難陀白佛言：「世尊！先聽兩重僧伽梨：一重欝多羅僧、一重安陀會。」
Nanda replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Previously, you allowed two layers of robes: one upper garment and one lower garment."

佛言：「此衣故多。」
The Buddha said, "These garments are still too many."

答言：「世尊！我有共行弟子、依止弟子等衣物，各作兩重僧伽梨：一重欝多羅僧、一重安多會，及作沙彌等衣。」
He replied, "World-Honored One! I have clothes for my co-practicing and dependent disciples, each made with two layers of robes: one upper garment, one lower garment, and also clothes for novices."

佛言：「此衣猶多。」
The Buddha said, "These garments are still excessive."

又白世尊：「我出家人臨時難得，是故此諸衣物浣染作竟，舉著器中。
He further appealed to the World-Honored One, "As a renunciant, it is difficult to obtain things when needed, so I wash and dye these garments and store them in containers when finished.

若衣壞時，當取易代。」
When a garment is damaged, I can take another to replace it."

佛告難陀：「此是惡事，汝出家人云何計常貪著？
The Buddha told Nanda, "This is a bad practice. How can you, as a renunciant, regularly plan for and attach to greed?

汝常不聞世尊呵責多求多欲難滿，讚歎少欲知足耶？」
Have you not often heard the World-Honored One rebuke those who are insatiably greedy and praise those with few desires and who are content?

汝今多欲難滿，廣求衣物積畜餘長，此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。
You now possess insatiable greed, hoarding excess garments in abundance, which is neither lawful, moral, nor according to the Buddha's teachings. This cannot nurture good practices.

云何畜長衣受用？
How can you justify accumulating long garments for use?

從今已去，若有長衣，聽一宿。」
From now on, if there are extra garments, you are permitted to keep them for one night only.




諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是難陀多畜諸衣不知厭足？」

The monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! How is it that Nanda accumulates many robes without knowing satisfaction?"

佛告諸比丘：「是難陀不但今日多畜諸衣不知厭足，過去世時已曾多畜不知厭足，如《鳥生經》中廣說。」

The Buddha told the monks, "Nanda not only accumulates many robes without knowing satisfaction today, but also did so in past lives, as elaborated in the Jataka tales."




復次佛住俱舍彌，為諸天世人恭敬供養。
Furthermore, when the Buddha resided in Kusha, he was honored and offered respect by both celestial beings and humans.

世尊時到著入聚落衣，持鉢入俱舍彌城，次行乞食。
When the Blessed One was ready, he donned his robe, took his bowl, and entered the town of Kusha to beg for alms.

爾時國王夫人名舍彌，以千五百張㲲奉上世尊。
At that time, a lady by the name of Shami, the wife of the king, offered the Blessed One fifteen hundred sheets of cloth.

佛告阿難：「持是㲲衣與諸比丘。」
The Buddha instructed Ananda, "Take these cloths and give them to the monks."

長老阿難即持與諸比丘。
Elder Ananda immediately distributed them among the monks.

諸比丘不受，語阿難言：「用劫貝為？浣染未竟，已不如法。」
However, the monks did not accept them and said to Ananda, "What will we use kashaya for? The washing and dyeing are not yet complete, so they are not allowable."

時阿難以是因緣，往白世尊。
Ananda thus went to the Blessed One to report this matter.

佛告阿難：「從今已去若得長衣，聽至十日。」
The Buddha said to Ananda, "From now on, if you receive long cloths, allow up to ten days to use them."

有諸比丘，長衣滿十日，持是諸衣往白世尊：「此衣滿十日，今當云何？」
Some monks, having had the cloths for ten days, approached the Blessed One and asked, "Now that the cloths have been with us for ten days, what should we do?"

佛告比丘：「若知識比丘邊，作淨施法。若復捨故受新，十日一易。」
The Buddha instructed the monks, "If you have a fellow monk who is knowledgeable, perform the pure offering ritual. If you dispose of the old and receive the new, you may exchange them every ten days."

復次佛在毘舍離，毘舍離人年年飯僧食已布施衣物，諸比丘不受。
Furthermore, when the Buddha was in Vaishali, the people of Vaishali would yearly offer food and cloths to the monks, but the monks did not accept them.

諸檀越詣佛所，禮足已白佛言：「頗有方便，聽諸比丘取衣受用，令施者得福，受者得利不？」
Some patrons approached the Buddha, bowed at his feet, and asked, "Is there any way to allow the monks to accept these robes so that the donors receive merits and the recipients benefit?"

佛言：「得。」
The Buddha replied, "Yes, it is possible."

如上廣說。
The detailed explanation is as stated above.



爾時世尊告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
At that time, the World-Honored One told the assembled monks: "Rely on the monks of Vesali to convene everyone, as the ten benefits of the precepts are for the monks, even those who have heard before should hear again.

若比丘衣已竟，迦絺那衣已捨，若得長衣，得至十日畜。
If a monk has completed his robe, the additional robe has been relinquished; if he receives a new robe, he may keep it for up to ten days.

過十日者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
After ten days, it becomes an offense requiring expiation."



衣已竟者，比丘三衣已成，是名衣竟。
When the robes are completed, the monk's three robes are completed, this is called the completion of robes.

不受迦絺那衣亦名衣竟；
Not accepting the Kaṭhina robe is also called the completion of robes;

已捨迦絺那衣亦名衣竟；
Having already given up the Kaṭhina robe is also called the completion of robes;

浣染衣訖亦名衣竟。
Washed and dyed robes are also called the completion of robes.




衣者，欽婆羅衣、劫貝衣、芻摩衣、俱舍耶衣、舍那衣、麻衣、軀牟提衣。  
Clothing includes kimbara robes, kaipeya robes, chuma robes, kushaya robes, shena robes, hemp robes, and kumuda robes.

復有衣名僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、尼師檀、雨浴衣、覆瘡衣、納衣、居士衣、糞掃衣、若作、若不作、如法衣、不如法衣、知識衣、迦絺那衣。  
There are also robes called Sanghati, Uttarasanga, Antarayika, Nisidana, Rain bathrobe, ulcer covering robe, patched robe, layperson's robe, dust-sweeping robe, whether made or not made, legal robes, illegal robes, knowing robes, and Kacina robes.




已捨者，捨迦絺那衣有十事捨：
For those who have already abandoned, there are ten relinquishments for discarding the Kaṭhina robe:

受衣捨、
Receiving robe relinquishment,

衣竟捨、
Completion of robe relinquishment,

時竟捨、
Completion of time relinquishment,

聞捨、
Hearing relinquishment,

出去捨、
Going out relinquishment,

失去捨、
Loss relinquishment,

壞捨、
Destruction relinquishment,

送衣捨、
Sending robe relinquishment,

時過捨、
Expiration of time relinquishment,

究竟捨。
Ultimate relinquishment.



齊十日者，數極至十日也。
The one who organizes ten days is the one who counts up to ten days.




長衣者，除所受持衣，餘衣是，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
As for the long robes, except for those that are received and worn, the remaining garments, after ten days, are subject to nissagiya pācittiya.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是長衣應僧中捨，波夜提罪懺悔。
The nissaggiya-pācittiya offense requires the relinquishing of an extra robe among the monks; it is a pācittiya offense requiring confession.

不捨而悔者，越比尼罪。
Failing to relinquish it and still confessing constitutes an offense against the Vinaya.




波夜提者，能墮惡道，開罪、現罪、舉罪，施設罪名也。

The term "Pārājika" pertains to offenses that lead one to fall into a bad path, which involves committing, manifesting, and disclosing offenses, thus establishing the names of offenses.




若比丘一日得十領衣，乃至十日不作淨，過十日，一切尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk receives ten robes in one day and does not purify them within ten days, after ten days, all are subject to forfeiture.

若比丘一日得十領衣，半作淨、半不作淨。
If a monk receives ten robes in one day and purifies half but not the other half.

若作淨者，是應淨法。
Those that are purified follow the proper procedure.

半不作淨者，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
The half that are not purified, after ten days, are subject to forfeiture.

若比丘一日得衣、二日作淨；二日復得衣、三日作淨；三日復得衣、四日復作淨；
If a monk receives robes on one day and purifies on the second; receives more on the second and purifies on the third; receives more on the third and purifies on the fourth;

四日復得衣、五日作淨；五日復得衣、六日作淨；六日復得衣、七日作淨；
receives more on the fourth and purifies on the fifth; receives more on the fifth and purifies on the sixth; receives more on the sixth and purifies on the seventh;

七日復得衣、八日作淨；八日復得衣、九日作淨；九日復得衣、十日作淨；
receives more on the seventh and purifies on the eighth; receives more on the eighth and purifies on the ninth; receives more on the ninth and purifies on the tenth;

十日復得衣，至十一日，一切盡尼薩耆波夜提，以相續不斷故。
receives more on the tenth and purifies on the eleventh, all are subject to forfeiture due to unbroken continuity.

若比丘一日得衣，即日作淨，乃至十日得衣、十日作淨；
If a monk receives robes on one day and purifies the same day, and continues like this up to ten days;

十一日得衣，十一日作淨，犯越比尼罪，以無間故。
receives robes on the eleventh day and purifies on the eleventh, commits a minor breach due to the lack of delay.

間者，比丘一日得衣，更停九日。
Delay means, if a monk receives robes on one day, then waits nine days.

二日得衣，更停八日。
Receives robes on the second day, then waits eight days.

三日得衣，更停七日。
Receives robes on the third day, then waits seven days.

四日得衣，更停六日。
Receives robes on the fourth day, then waits six days.

五日得衣，更停五日。
Receives robes on the fifth day, then waits five days.

六日得衣，更停四日。
Receives robes on the sixth day, then waits four days.

七日得衣，更停三日。
Receives robes on the seventh day, then waits three days.

八日得衣，更停二日。
Receives robes on the eighth day, then waits two days.

九日得衣，更停一日。
Receives robes on the ninth day, then waits one day.

十日得衣，即十日作淨。
Receives robes on the tenth day and purifies on the tenth day.

十一日得衣不應受，是名間。
If robes are received on the eleventh day, they should not be accepted; this is termed delay.

若比丘前得衣多、後得衣少，以前衣力故，得尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk receives many robes earlier and fewer later, due to the power of the earlier robes, he incurs forfeiture.

若比丘前得衣少、後得衣多，以前衣力故，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk receives fewer robes earlier and more later, due to the power of the earlier robes, he incurs forfeiture.

若比丘前衣有、中間無，若有者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk has robes earlier, none in the middle, and then has some, there is forfeiture.

若比丘前衣無、中間有，若有者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk has no robes earlier, some in the middle, and then has some, there is forfeiture.




比丘不受迦絺那衣謂受想、
The monk does not accept the Kaashina robe thinking he will accept it,

捨迦絺那衣不捨想、
He discards the Kaashina robe without thinking of giving it up,

不受衣謂受想、
Not accepting a robe thinking he will accept it,

不作淨謂淨想、
Not making it pure thinking it is pure,

不與謂與衣想、
Not giving thinking he is giving the robe,

不記識謂記識想、
Not remembering thinking he is remembering,

愚、內心、非處作淨。
Foolishness within the mind, not making it pure.




不受迦絺那衣謂受想者，
When one thinks they have received the Kaṣāya robe when they have not,

比丘不受迦絺那衣，
A monk has not received the Kaṣāya robe,

自謂已受，
and claims to have received it,

長衣過十日，
and retains the robe beyond ten days,

尼薩耆波夜提。
it results in a nissaggiya pācittiya (an offense requiring expiation and forfeiture).



捨迦絺那衣不捨想者，
Those who have not abandoned the idea of relinquishing the rag robe,

比丘已捨迦絺那衣，
A monk has already given up the rag robe,

而自謂未捨，
But claims he has not yet given it up,

長衣過十日，
Keeping the robe beyond ten days,

犯尼薩耆波夜提。
Commits an offense of expiation.



不受衣謂受想者，

He who considers not receiving the robe as having received it,

若比丘三衣自不受，便謂已受想，

If a monk does not accept the three robes himself but believes he has accepted them,

不作淨過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。

without completing the purification for more than ten days, it constitutes a Nisagia offense.




不作净谓净想者，比丘畜长衣不作净施，而谓已作净施，过十日，尼萨耆波夜提。
A monk who keeps a large robe and thinks it is pure without purifying it, and claims to have purified it, after ten days, commits a nisagi piya.




不与谓与想者，是衣不与塔、不与僧、不与人，而谓呼与，过十日，尼萨耆波夜提。

If something is not given but considered as given, such as a robe not given to a stupa, not given to a monk, not given to a person, but said to be given, after ten days, it is considered an offense.




不記識謂記識想者，若比丘不記識，言：「此是尼師檀、此是覆瘡衣、此是雨浴衣。」
If a monk does not perceive as cognizable what should be perceived, saying: "This is a nisidana, this is a cover for sores, this is a rain bathing cloth."

而謂記識，不作淨，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
But perceives it as cognizable and does not make it clean within ten days, it is an offense of nissaggiya pacittiya.



愚者，若比丘得衣，愚闇故不作淨，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
Fools, if a monk obtains a robe, due to foolishness and ignorance, and does not purify it, after ten days, it is a Nissaggiya Pacittiya.




內心者，內心說淨，而口不言，是名非法淨，犯越比尼罪。
Inwardly, if one's mind is pure and silent but does not speak, this is called illegitimate purity and violates the Vinaya precepts.

若口說者，無罪。
If one speaks, there is no offense.




非處者，若俗人、若畜生、若無心邊作淨，是不名作淨。
In inappropriate places, if purification is done by ordinary people, animals, or without intention, it is not considered purification.

過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
After ten days, there is a nissaggiya pācittiya (an offense requiring forfeiture and confession).




優波離白佛言：「世尊！比丘長衣應作淨，何等人邊作淨？」

Upali said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! For a monk's robe that needs to be purified, by which people should it be purified?"

佛告優波離：「當於比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼邊作淨。」

The Buddha told Upali, "It should be purified by monks, nuns, Shikshamanas, male novices, or female novices."

又問：「相離近遠，得從彼作淨？」

He asked again, "If they are near or far away, can it still be purified by them?"

佛言：「齊三由旬，知其存亡。」

The Buddha said, "As long as they are within three yojanas, their status of being alive or deceased is known."

優波離白佛言：「世尊！長衣沙彌邊作淨，是沙彌受具足，當云何？」

Upali said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! If a long robe is purified by a novice who has taken the full vows, what should be done?"

佛言：「稱無歲比丘名作淨。」

The Buddha said, "Call him an 'ageless monk' for the purpose of purification."

優波離復問：「是無歲比丘若死者云何？」

Upali further asked, "What if this 'ageless monk' dies?"

佛言：「得停十日，於餘知識邊作淨。」

The Buddha said, "You may wait for ten days and then purify it with another known person."

復問：「齊幾許應作淨？幾許不作淨？」

He asked again, "For how long should it be purified? And when should it not be purified?"

佛言：「廣一肘、長二肘，應作淨。」

The Buddha said, "If it is one cubit wide and two cubits long, it should be purified."




若比丘二人共物，未分不犯；
If two monks share an item and it is not distributed, there is no offense.

若分得已應作淨，若不作淨，過十日者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If it is distributed, it should be purified; if not purified within ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘，婆羅門舍請僧食并施衣物。
If a monk is invited to a Brahmin's house for a meal and given clothing or items,

有病比丘，囑人取衣分，是比丘持衣分來，雖久未與，不犯，
a sick monk asks someone to take a portion of the clothing, and it is brought, even if delayed, there is no offense.

若得已，應作淨。不作淨者，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
If obtained, it should be purified; if not done, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘聞若師、若弟子送衣與，未得，雖久不犯；
If a monk hears that a teacher or disciple is sending clothes, even if not received and delayed, there is no offense;

若得已應作淨，若不作淨，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
If received, it should be purified; if not done, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘令織師織衣，衣竟雖久，未與，比丘不犯；
If a monk commissions a weaver to make a robe, even if completed and delayed, there is no offense if not given;

得衣已應作淨，若不作淨，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
If received, it should be purified; if not done, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘買衣，雖價決了，未得，不犯；
If a monk buys a robe, even if the price is settled and not yet received, there is no offense;

得已應作淨，若不作淨，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
If obtained, it should be purified; if not done, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘為佛為僧供養故，求衣物集在一處，
If a monk gathers clothing items together for offering to the Buddha or the Sangha,

雖久未用，不犯。
even if long unused, there is no offense.

若比丘於佛生處、得道處、轉法輪處、阿難設會處、羅云設會處、五歲會處，
If a monk is in places like the birthplace of the Buddha, the place of Enlightenment, the place of the first teaching, the assembly hall made by Ananda, the congregation held by Rohana, or the five-year gathering,

大得布施諸衣物，是物入僧末分者，雖久不犯；
and receives a great donation of clothing items yet to be distributed within the Sangha, there is no offense even if delayed;

是物已分，多人共得一分，
if the items are distributed and a group receives a portion,

中有善毘尼人，能為眾人同意作淨者，無罪；
if someone proficient in the Vinaya purifies them with consent from all, there is no offense;

若不作淨者，過十日，犯尼薩耆波夜提。
but if not purified, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘道路行恐畏處，藏衣而去，過十日取者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk hides a robe fearing while traveling and retrieves it after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若有人取是衣物，持來與比丘者，亦尼薩耆波夜提。
If someone takes the robe and gives it to the monk, it is also an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.

若比丘為賊所逐，遂便捨衣走，過十日已有人得衣，來還比丘者，無罪。
If a monk, chased by thieves, abandons his robe and someone returns it to him after ten days, there is no offense.

不失失想、失不失想、若失失想，皆不犯，過十日無罪。
Whether thinking it lost when it is not, thinking it not lost when it is, or thinking it lost when it is, there is no offense after ten days.

不失不失想，過十日，尼薩耆波夜提。
If it is not lost and considered not lost, after ten days, it is an offense leading to expiation with forfeiture.



過十日，欲捨衣者，當求持律比丘、能羯磨人，請諸知識比丘，出界外。
If a monk has kept a robe for over ten days and wishes to relinquish it, he should find a monk versed in discipline and a person who can perform a formal act, invite knowledgeable monks, and go outside the boundary.

若無界場，應結小界，羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！若僧時到，僧於此地，齊僧坐處外一尋以內，於其中作羯磨。
If there is no boundary area, a small boundary should be established. The officiant should say: "Venerable assembly, listen! If the time is right for the assembly, we should carry out the formal act within the area extending one yojana outside the monk's sitting place."

諸大德聽！於此處齊僧坐處外一尋已內，於其中作羯磨。僧忍默然故，是事如是持。
"Venerable ones, listen! Within the area extending one yojana outside the monk's sitting place, a formal act will be conducted. The assembly remains silent as a sign of approval; thus, the matter is held so."

不羯磨地者，不得作僧事，若作者得越比尼罪。
Without conducting the formal act, one cannot perform monastic activities, and if one does, he incurs a transgression.

律師應語是比丘言：「汝捨此衣。」是比丘應䠒跪合掌作如是言：「大德僧憶念！我某甲比丘是長衣過十日，犯尼薩耆，我今於僧中捨。」
The disciplinarian should tell the monk: "You relinquish this robe." The monk should kneel with joined palms and say: "Venerable assembly, please recall! I, such-and-such monk, have kept the robe for more than ten days and committed an offense. I now relinquish it within the assembly."

持律復問：「汝是衣曾受用不？」若言：「受用。」應語：「汝得波夜提罪，受用不淨衣故，隨用得越比尼罪。」
The disciplinarian asks again: "Did you use this robe?" If he says, "I used it," he should be told, "You incurred an offense for using an impure robe, thus committing a transgression."

若言：「不受用」者，語言：「汝得波夜提罪。」
If he says, "I did not use it," he is told, "You incurred an offense."

是比丘於持律前䠒跪合掌白言：「長老憶念！我某甲長衣過十日，已於僧中捨。此中犯波夜提罪，今於長老前悔過，不敢覆藏。」
The monk kneels before the disciplinarian and says: "Elder, please recall! I, such-and-such, have kept the robe for over ten days and have relinquished it within the assembly. I committed an offense and now repent before the elder, not daring to conceal it."

持律問言：「汝自見罪不？」答言：「見。」應教：「更莫復作。」答言：「爾。」如是第二、第三說。
The disciplinarian asks: "Do you see your fault?" He replies, "I see." He should be instructed, "Do not repeat this." He responds, "Yes." Repeat this a second and third time.

若受用者：「長老憶念！我某甲比丘長衣過十日，已於僧中捨。此中犯波夜提罪，及受用不淨衣隨用，得越比尼罪。
If he used it, he says, "Elder, please recall! I, such-and-such monk, have kept the robe for over ten days and have relinquished it within the assembly. I committed an offense for using the impure robe, thus committing a transgression."

是一切罪，今向長老誠心悔過，不敢覆藏。」持律問言：「汝自見罪不？」答言：「見。」「汝更莫作。」答言：「頂戴持。」
For all these offenses, I now sincerely repent before the elder, not daring to conceal them." The disciplinarian asks, "Do you see your fault?" He replies, "I see." "Do not repeat this." He answers, "I accept."

如是第二、第三說。律師問：「此眾中誰是汝知識？」答言：「某甲。」即語隨次坐。
Repeat this a second and third time. The disciplinarian asks, "Who is your acquaintance in this assembly?" He replies, "Such-and-such." Then he is instructed to sit in order.

應說羯磨：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘長衣過十日，已於僧中捨，已如法作。若僧時到，僧持此衣，與某甲知識比丘，如是白。」
The formal act should be stated: "Venerable assembly, listen! A certain monk has kept a robe for over ten days and has already relinquished it following the rules. If the time is right, the assembly is to handle this robe and give it to such-and-such monk's acquaintance."

「大德僧聽！是某甲比丘長衣過十日，已於僧中捨，已如法作。僧今持此衣與某甲知識比丘，諸大德忍持此衣與某甲知識比丘者默然，若不忍者便說，是初羯磨。」
"Venerable assembly, listen! A certain monk has kept a robe for over ten days and has relinquished it according to the rules. The assembly now hands this robe to such-and-such monk's acquaintance. Those who agree to give this robe to such-and-such monk's acquaintance remain silent; if disagreeable, speak out. This is the first formal act."

如是第二、第三說。「僧已忍，持此衣與某甲知識比丘竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
Repeat this a second and third time. "If the assembly is silent, hand this robe to such-and-such monk's acquaintance. The assembly's silence indicates acquiescence; thus, the matter is held so."

是知識比丘應即日、若明日還彼衣，亦不得於眾僧前還，亦不得停久過半月還也。
The acquaintance monk should return the robe either the same day or the next, not before the assembly and not kept longer than half a month.

是比丘得衣已，若受持、若作淨、若不知受持及不知作淨者，當教言：「我某甲，此僧伽梨、此欝多羅僧、此安多會，盡受不離宿受持。」
After obtaining the robe, whether keeping it or purifying it, if not knowing how to keep or purify it, he should be instructed to say: "I, such-and-such, fully accept this sanghati, uttarasangha, and antarvasa without breaking overnight."

如是三說。若作淨者，應教言：「我某甲比丘，是長衣淨施與某甲，某甲於我邊不計意若浣染縫，有因緣事當隨意用。」
Repeat this a third time. If it is purified, he should be instructed to say: "I, such-and-such monk, offer this robe purely to such-and-such. Such-and-such does not hold any intention toward washing, dyeing, or sewing by my side; they may use it according to circumstances."

如是三說。若比丘衣已竟、迦絺那衣已捨，長衣齊十日，畜過十日者，尼薩耆波夜提，是故說。
Repeat this a third time. If a monk's robe is complete, if the kathina robe is relinquished, and a long robe is kept for ten days, keeping it more than ten days incurs an offense. Thus it is said


佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

The Buddha stayed in the city of Sravasti and preached extensively as above.

有一婆羅門請眾僧經宿供養，并施衣物。

A Brahmin invited the monks to stay overnight and offered provisions, including clothing.

諸比丘聞彼請僧，各作是念：

When the monks heard of the invitation, each of them thought:

「今時和適不寒不熱，我等但著上下衣往，若彼得施衣，當作三衣受持。」

"Now is a suitable time, neither cold nor hot; we should just wear our outer and inner robes to go, and if we receive any clothes, they should be accepted as additional robes."

即便著上下衣去。

So they put on their outer and inner robes and went.




爾時世尊以五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，開一房戶見架上多衣。
At that time, the World-Honored One, for the sake of benefiting with five affairs, would go to the monks' quarters every five days and open a door to see many clothes on the shelf.

世尊知而故問：「架上多衣者為是誰許？」
The World-Honored One knew but purposely asked, "To whom does the many clothes on the shelf belong?"

有病比丘白世尊言：「有婆羅門，請諸比丘經宿供養布施衣物，是諸比丘以天時暖，留此諸衣，著上下衣去。」
A sick monk said to the World-Honored One, "There was a Brahmin who invited the monks to stay overnight and offered them clothing as alms. Because of the warm weather, the monks left these clothes and wore upper and lower garments to leave."

若彼得施衣，當受作三衣。
If they receive offered clothes, they should accept them as the three robes.

佛告諸比丘：「當知如來應供第一樂人，出家離第一樂，而隨所住處，常三衣俱持鉢乞食。
The Buddha said to the monks, "The Tathagata, who accepts offerings, is the foremost amongst those who find joy. Having left home, one should leave all pleasures and, no matter where one stays, always keep the three robes and carry a bowl to beg for food.

譬如鳥之兩翼，恒與身俱。
Just like a bird's two wings, always with the body.

汝等比丘！云何捨本族姓以信出家？
Monks, how can you abandon your family name and homeland to become religious?

應當如是，所至到處法衣隨身，不應離宿。
One should do the same, having the robes accompany them wherever they go and should not stay away from them."



復次佛在舍衛城，安居訖詣王舍城。

Furthermore, the Buddha was in Śrāvastī, and after the rainy retreat, he went to Rājagṛha.

時有一比丘，王舍城中以信出家，於餘聚落安居訖。

At that time, there was a monk who left home out of faith in Rājagṛha and completed his retreat in another village.

聞世尊安居訖詣王舍城：「我今當往問訊世尊！」

Hearing that the Blessed One completed the retreat in Rājagṛha, he thought, "I should now go pay respect to the Blessed One!"

并從佛去過看親里，天時不寒不熱，我當留一衣，但著上下衣去。

Also, taking the opportunity to visit relatives as the weather was neither cold nor hot, he decided to leave one robe and only wear the upper and lower garments.

乃至世尊種種呵責比丘之法，法衣應器常與身俱，譬如鳥飛毛羽自隨，不應離宿。

Until the Blessed One's various admonishments for monks, the legal robes and bowl should always accompany the body, just as feathers follow a flying bird; they should not be left behind overnight.




復次佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園精舍，

Again, the Buddha was residing in the Bamboo Grove Monastery at Veluvana in Rajagaha.

長老舍利弗作是念：「我今當為饒益親里故，往詣那羅聚落安居，

The elder Sariputta thought to himself, "I should now go to the village of Nalaka for the benefit of my relatives.

意復不欲遠離世尊。以恭敬故，難往白佛。」

Yet, I do not wish to be far from the Blessed One. Out of respect, I find it difficult to approach the Buddha."

諸比丘聞已，即以是事廣白世尊。

The monks, upon hearing this, reported it in detail to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「從今日聽王舍城竹園精舍、僧那羅聚落僧共作一布薩界，

The Buddha said to the monks, "From today, the Bamboo Grove Monastery in Rajagaha and the monks in the village of Nalaka are allowed to form a common Uposatha boundary.

令舍利弗安樂住。」

This is to ensure that Sariputta can reside comfortably."

羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！

The formal act should be initiated by saying, "Venerable Sangha, please listen!

從今日王舍城竹園精舍、那羅聚落作一布薩界。

From today, the Bamboo Grove Monastery and the village of Nalaka form one Uposatha boundary.

若僧時到，僧今從王舍城竹園精舍、那羅聚落共作一布薩界，如是白。」

When the time comes for the Sangha, the monks now declare the Uposatha boundary as jointly that of the Bamboo Grove Monastery and the village of Nalaka."

白一羯磨，乃至僧忍默然故，是事如是持。

After announcing the motion and upon the silence of the Sangha, let this matter be carried out."



爾時尊者舍利弗於那羅聚落結安居，日日詣竹園精舍，禮世尊足。
At that time, the Venerable Sariputta stayed in the village of Nalaka during the rainy season, visiting the Veluvana Monastery daily to pay homage to the Blessed One.

值天七日連雨，便作是念：「我今體羸，是僧伽梨重，正欲持去，被雨遂重；若不持去，脫不得還，便應捨墮。
During seven consecutive days of rain, he thought, "I am now weak in body, and my robe is heavy. If I carry it, it will become even heavier due to the rain; if I don't carry it, I cannot return without it and it will be lost."

且住待雨晴已，往詣世尊。」道逢諸外道，即共論議，如《沙門果經》中說。
"I should wait until the rain clears before going to the Blessed One." On the way, he encountered some non-Buddhists, and engaged in discussions with them as mentioned in the Samaññaphala Sutta.

然後往詣世尊！禮拜問訊。
Then he proceeded to the Blessed One, paid respects, and inquired about his well-being.

佛知而故問：「舍利弗！何以多日不現？」
The Buddha, knowing but asking nonetheless, said, "Sariputta, why have you not appeared for so many days?"

即向世尊廣說上事。
Sariputta then explained the above matters to the Blessed One.

爾時世尊告諸比丘：「從今日後王舍城竹園精舍、那羅聚落作不離衣宿界，令諸比丘得安樂住。」
At that time, the Blessed One addressed the monks: "From today onward, from Veluvana Monastery in Rajagaha to the village of Nalaka, establish a boundary where monks do not part with their robes, allowing them to dwell comfortably."

羯磨者當作是說：「大德僧聽！今從王舍城竹園精舍至那羅聚落，除聚落及聚落界，作不失衣法。
The formal act should be recited as follows: "Venerable Sangha, listen! From Veluvana Monastery in Rajagaha to the village of Nalaka, excluding the village and its boundaries, a rule is established to prevent loss of robes.

若僧時到，僧從王舍城至那羅聚落，除聚落及聚落界，作不失衣法，如是白。」
When the time comes, the Sangha, from Veluvana Monastery to the village of Nalaka, excluding the village and its boundaries, should declare the non-loss of robes rule thus."

「大德僧聽！從王舍城竹園精舍，至那羅聚落，除聚落及聚落界。
"Venerable Sangha, listen! From Veluvana Monastery in Rajagaha to the village of Nalaka, excluding the village and its boundaries.

僧今於是中作不失衣法。
The Sangha will now establish the non-loss of robes rule in this area.

諸大德忍從王舍城至那羅聚落，除聚落及聚落界，是中作不失衣法者默然，若不忍者便說。
Those venerable ones who agree with establishing this rule from Veluvana Monastery to the village of Nalaka, excluding the village and its boundaries, should remain silent; those who do not agree may speak."

僧已忍，從王舍城至那羅聚落，除聚落及聚落界，作不失衣法竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。
If the Sangha agrees and is silent, the non-loss of robes rule from Veluvana Monastery to the village of Nalaka, excluding the village and its boundaries, is thus upheld.

作不失衣法已，此王舍城趣那羅聚落道兩邊，各二十五肘名為界。
When the non-loss of robes rule is established, the path from Rajagaha to the village of Nalaka on both sides, each twenty-five cubits wide, is named the boundary.

若衣在道中得，道左右各二十五肘置衣。
If the robe is obtained within this path, place it twenty-five cubits to the left or right of the path.

王舍城得，至那羅聚落無罪，置衣那羅聚落亦如是。
If obtained in Rajagaha, there is no offense in placing the robe in the village of Nalaka, and vice versa.

王舍城竹園精舍、那羅聚落亦復如是。
The same rule applies to Veluvana Monastery in Rajagaha and the village of Nalaka.

如舍利弗因緣、目揵連因緣，亦復如是。
Similar circumstances apply to Sariputta and Maudgalyayana.



復次世尊住舍衛城祇洹精舍，有一比丘食後欲詣開眼林坐禪，便作是念：「我或於彼中宿，便失僧伽梨。」
Furthermore, the Blessed One was staying at the Jetavana Monastery in Śrāvastī. After a meal, a certain monk wanted to go to the Open Eye Grove to meditate and thought, "If I stay there, I might lose my outer robe."

即持三衣去。
So he took all three robes with him.

過見世尊，佛知而故問：「比丘！何以多持衣行？」
On the way, he met the Blessed One, and the Buddha, knowing the reason, asked, "Monk, why are you carrying so many robes?"

答言：「世尊！我欲往開眼林坐禪，暮脫不還，恐失僧伽梨，故持三衣去。」
He replied, "Blessed One, I wish to go to the Open Eye Grove to meditate and might stay overnight without returning, thus I fear losing the outer robe, so I brought all three robes."

佛告諸比丘：「從今日後從祇洹林，至開眼林、東坊精舍、西坊精舍、東林精舍、西林精舍、王園精舍、受籌塔婆羅林精舍，盡同作不失衣法，令諸比丘得安樂住。」
The Buddha then told the monks, "From now on, from Jetavana Grove to the Open Eye Grove, the Eastern and Western quarters, the Eastern Grove Monastery, the Western Grove Monastery, the King's Garden Monastery, and the Bamboo Grove Monastery of Pacifying Peace Pavilion, all shall follow the rule for safeguarding robes, enabling all monks to reside comfortably."

羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！今從祇洹至開眼林，東林精舍乃至受籌塔，是中除聚落及聚落界。」
As for the procedure, it should be said, "Venerable Sangha, listen! Now, from Jetavana to the Open Eye Grove, from the Eastern Grove Monastery to Pacifying Peace Pavilion, excluding villages and the areas between village boundaries."

若僧時到，僧從祇洹林，乃至受籌塔羯磨，作不失衣法，如是白。
When the Sangha assembles, from Jetavana Grove to Pacifying Peace Pavilion, the procedure regarding safeguarding robes shall be adhered to, thus I declare.

「大德僧聽！從祇洹林乃至受籌塔，是中除聚落及聚落界，僧今作不失衣法。
"Venerable Sangha, listen! From Jetavana Grove to Pacifying Peace Pavilion, excluding villages and their territories, the Sangha now follows the procedure for not losing robes.

諸大德忍從祇洹林至開眼林，乃至受籌塔，作不失衣法，忍者僧默然，若不忍便說。」
All Venerable ones, if you agree with the rule from Jetavana Grove to the Open Eye Grove up to Pacifying Peace Pavilion for safeguarding robes, remain silent; if not, speak up."

「僧已忍，從祇洹林至開眼林，乃至受籌塔，作不失衣法竟。僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has consented, from Jetavana Grove to the Open Eye Grove up to Pacifying Peace Pavilion, the procedure for safeguarding robes is completed. The Sangha remained silent in agreement, thus this rule is upheld."



衛城祇洹精舍，爾時舍衛城中失火。
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing at Jetavana Monastery in Sravasti, and at that time a fire broke out in the city of Sravasti.

時城中諸人象馬車乘男女擔負衣物出城，諸比丘多於城中寄衣，畏火燒衣故急走向城。
The men and women riding elephants, horses, and chariots in the city carried their clothes out of the city; many monks had left their robes in the city, so they rushed back fearing their clothes would be burned.

城中諸人不信佛者，皆呵責言：「我等火逼出城避難，是沙門等向城而走，如蛾赴火，有何急事？」
Those in the city who did not believe in the Buddha criticized, saying, "We are driven out by the fire to avoid disaster, yet these ascetics run into the city like moths to a flame. What urgent matter do they have?"

時有人言：「汝莫語此沙門輩不順正理，欲取人物，譬如賊伺人慢藏，如醫治病，以自濟活。
Then someone said, "Do not accuse these ascetics of being unreasonable; they wish to retrieve their belongings just as thieves watch for careless keeping, as a doctor treats an illness to save lives.

是沙門輩亦復如是，伺人災患向城而走，是壞敗人有何道哉！」
These ascetics are the same; they run towards the city during a disaster. How can they claim to possess any principle?"

諸比丘聞已，以是因緣具白世尊。
After hearing this, the monks reported the matter to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those monks here."

即呼來已，佛問諸比丘：「汝等何故向城而走，為世人所嫌？」
After they were called, the Buddha asked the monks, "Why did you run towards the city and become the object of the people's reproach?"

答言：「我等衣物先在城中，城中失火，畏火燒故，走往取之。」
They replied, "We had left our clothes and belongings in the city. When a fire broke out, we ran to retrieve them out of fear they would be burned."

佛問比丘：「汝等云何僧不作羯磨，而離衣宿？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "How is it that you left your clothes without performing the prescribed procedures?"

答言：「作羯磨。」
They replied, "We performed the procedures."

復問：「云何作？」
He asked again, "How did you do it?"

答言：「通結舍衛城。」
They replied, "We established a connection with the city of Sravasti."

佛告比丘：「汝等云何阿練若處，通結聚落？
The Buddha said to the monks, "How can you establish a connection between a remote place and a village?

從今已後不聽阿練若處通結聚落，應阿練若處通結阿練若處、聚落處通結聚落處。
From now on, do not allow such connections. Remote places should connect with remote places, and villages with villages.

若阿練若處通結聚落，聚落處通結阿練若處者，得越比尼罪。」
If a remote place is connected with a village, or a village with a remote place, it will incur a transgression


佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "The monks residing in Sravasti City should all gather together. For the sake of ten benefits, I establish precepts for the monks, so that those who have heard them may hear them again.

若比丘衣已竟，迦絺那衣已捨，若三衣中離一一衣餘處一宿，除僧羯磨，尼薩耆波夜提。」

If a monk has finished his robe, or has abandoned the robe of the Kathina, and among the three robes, remains away from any single robe for one night, except for an act of the Sangha, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.




衣竟者，三衣已成是名衣竟；

The completion of clothing means that the three garments are finished, which is called the completion of clothing.

不受迦絺那衣亦名衣竟；

Not receiving the Kathina robe is also called the completion of clothing.

捨迦絺那衣亦名衣竟；

Donating the Kathina robe is also called the completion of clothing.

浣染竟亦名衣竟。

Washing and dyeing is also called the completion of clothing.

衣者，劫貝衣、欽婆羅衣、芻摩衣、憍奢耶衣、舍那衣、麻衣、軀牟提衣。

Clothing includes Kappāsika robes, Kambala robes, Kusa robes, Kasāya robes, Khoma robes, linen robes, and woolen robes.




捨迦絺那衣者有十事，從受衣捨，乃至究竟捨。
There are ten instructions for abandoning the Kaṭhina robe, from receiving the robe to ultimately abandoning it.




一宿者，從日未沒至明相出時。
A night is from the time the sun is not yet set until dawn breaks.




三衣者，僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會。
The three robes are: the saṃghāti, the uttarāsaṅga, and the antarvāsa.




除僧羯磨者，僧不作羯磨，不聽離衣宿。
Except for the monks' procedures, if the monks do not follow the procedures, they are not allowed to sleep without robes.

設作羯磨，白不成就、羯磨不成就、眾不成就，若羯磨一一不如法，是名不作作。
If the procedures are followed improperly, such as if the announcement is not completed, the procedures aren't completed, or the assembly isn't completed, if any part does not conform with the rules, it is called "not properly done."

羯磨者，白成就、羯磨成就、眾成就、一一羯磨如法，是名僧作羯磨，世尊說無罪。
When the procedures are correctly followed, with the announcement, procedures, and assembly completed, and each part is in accordance with the rules, it is called the proper completion of procedures, and the Blessed One declared there is no offense.




尼薩耆波夜提者，此衣應僧中捨，波夜提應悔過。
Nisaggiya Pācittiya items should be relinquished among the monks; Pācittiya offenses should be confessed.

不捨而悔者，得越比尼罪。
Failing to relinquish and only confessing results in a transgression of the Vinaya.




波夜提者，如上說。
Bodhiyanga is as described above.




羯磨界
The realm of ritual action

遊行界
The realm of wandering

依止界
The realm of dependence

七菴婆羅界
The realm of the seven temples



羯磨界者，廣略聚落，稱名標幟，隨曲避難。
The karmavācanā boundary involves various townships whose names and boundaries are marked, adjusted to navigate obstacles.

諸方廣者，如摩頭羅國，有叢林精舍。
In vast areas such as the country of Mathurā, there are monastic complexes in the forest.

摩頭羅東有遙扶那河，河東有仙人聚落精舍。
To the east of Mathurā is the Yāmuna River, and to its east is the hermitage-moncastery of sages.

時仙人聚落精舍，比丘遣使白叢林精舍僧言：「我欲共結一布薩界。」
At that time, monks from the hermitage-moncastery of sages sent a messenger to the forest monastery monks saying, "We wish to establish a communal Uposatha boundary."

問言：「何以故？」
They asked, "Why is that so?"

答言：「彼間多好飲食、得別房衣、得安居衣，是故欲同。」
The answer was: "There are abundant good foods, opportunities to obtain individual quarters and certain robes, hence the desire to join."

應報言：「為衣食來者，此非所宜，但彼間住。」
The reply should be, "Those who come for food and clothing, this is not suitable, they should stay there."

若言：「我所住處多年少比丘，不善契經、比尼、阿毘曇，不善觀陰、界、入、十二因緣，是故欲來就諸長老學契經、毘尼、阿毘曇，陰、界、入、觀十二因緣。」
If one says, "The junior monks where I reside are not proficient in the scriptures, Vinaya, or Abhidharma, nor in contemplating the aggregates, sensory realms, bases, or the twelve links, thus I wish to approach the elders to learn these."

彼應語言：「汝後僧作羯磨法事時，不作障礙者，當共汝同。
They should say, "If you do not impede the ordination procedure, we will join with you when such events occur."

應語一切比丘盡來，若不來者，一切盡出界去。
Notify all monks to come; those who do not, will exit the boundary.

若來若出界去已，當作羯磨。」
Whether they come or leave the boundary, proceed with the karmic act.

羯磨者應作是說：「大德僧聽！從今叢林精舍、仙人聚落精舍，是中內界、外界、內外界、中間界，若僧時到，僧是叢林精舍、仙人聚落精舍，是中共作一布薩界，如是白。」
For the ritual, say: "Elders, hear! From now, the interior and exterior boundaries, the midway areas of the forest and sage settlements when the convened monks arrive, will form a single Uposatha boundary, declared thus."

「大德僧聽！是叢林精舍、仙人聚落精舍，是內界、外界、內外界、中間界，僧今共作一布薩界。諸大德忍從叢林精舍、仙人聚落精舍，是二界共作一布薩界者默然，若不忍便說。」
"Elders, hear! These are the boundaries of the forest and sage settlements, now forming a single Uposatha boundary. If one consents to this union of two boundaries into one and remains silent, if not, speak out."

「僧已忍磨頭羅叢林精舍、仙人聚落精舍，是二界共作一布薩界竟。僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
"The monks have consented to the combination of Mathurā’s forest and sage hermitage as a single Uposatha boundary. Silence signals agreement. Thus, the matter stands."

若中間無河水者，應一處作羯磨。
If there are no river waters in the middle, perform the ritual in one place.

中有河水者，應三處作羯磨：一、摩頭羅精舍；二、水中；三、仙人聚落精舍。
Where river water is in between, conduct the ritual in three places: 1. Mathurā Monastery; 2. In the water; 3. Sage Hermitage.

若河水中有洲者，應五處作羯磨：一、摩頭羅精舍；二、水中；三、洲上；四、水中；五、仙人聚落。
If there's an island in the river, perform the ritual in five places: 1. Mathurā Monastery; 2. In the water; 3. On the island; 4. In the water; 5. Sage Hermitage.

如陸地，道兩邊各二十五肘，水中亦爾。
Like land, both sides of a path span twenty-five cubits, so it is in water.

一時夏水漲，比丘受欲來應羯磨，為水所漂出界去，殆死得出。
Once, during the summer flood, a monk sought permission to attend the ritual, was swept out of bounds by the current, and nearly drowned.

白諸比丘：「我向持欲來，為水所漂，殆死得出，今可廣結界不？」
He reported to the monks, "I had intended to come but was swept by the water, nearly perished. Shall the boundary be expanded now?"

諸比丘言：「得，汝去上下水三由旬作識，若樹、若石、若堆，如是等作識來。」
The monks said, "Yes, mark three leagues upstream and downstream with trees, rocks, or heaps; use these as guides."

說羯磨者應作是言：「大德僧聽！從磨頭羅精舍至仙人聚落精舍，從分齊以來內界、外界、內外界、中間界、上下水中。
For the ritual, proclaim: "Elders, hear! From Mathurā Monastery to Sage Hermitage, the division includes interior, exterior, combined, and intermediate boundaries, as well as upstream and downstream."

若僧時到，僧從摩頭羅精舍至仙人聚落精舍，河水上下從分齊已來，作一羯磨布薩界，如是白。」
When the monks arrive from Mathurā to Sage Hermitage, form a karmic Uposatha boundary, declared thus."

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
Declare one ritual until "The monks consent, silent agreement. Thus, the matter holds."

復有一時持欲來赴羯磨，就船欲渡。船師挽船上流，然後當渡。
Once more, seeking permission to attend the ritual, they boarded a ship to cross. The captain had to drag the vessel upstream before clearing the way.

語比丘言：「船重難牽，汝可步去，至應渡處便上。」
He advised the monk, "The boat is heavy, it's hard to tow. Walk till you reach the crossing point, then board."

是比丘以持欲故，不應上岸。出界失欲故，便於岸底涉水而進。
The monk, due to holding a wish, shouldn't leave the shore. Losing the desire due to crossing the boundary, he proceeded through water along the bottom to move forward.

船去疾，遂出界分。
The ship quickly sailed, thus leaving the boundary.

比丘即於界內，直浮趣船，水復漂船下過三由旬。
The monk floated inside the boundary, headed straight to the boat, again swept by water downstream three leagues.

比丘復應捨船，直浮趣岸，到彼已涉水尋岸而上。
The monk should abandon the boat, head directly to the shore, reach and ford the water to climb up the bank.

到道口入界內，然後上岸，是名廣說。
Reach the road's entrance into the boundary, then step ashore, is the extended teaching.



略說者，羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！
In brief, the Kamma master should say: "Venerable Sangha, listen!

今從摩頭羅精舍至仙人聚落精舍，內界、外界、內外界、中間界。
From the Motura Monastery to the Ascetic's Settlement Monastery, there are internal, external, internal-external, and intermediate boundaries.

若僧時到，僧今從摩頭羅精舍、仙人聚落精舍，共作一布薩界，如是白。」
When the Sangha is present, the monks now from the Motura Monastery and the Ascetic's Settlement Monastery form a Uposatha boundary together, thus it is declared.

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。
Declare a single Kamma, until "The Sangha is amenable and silent.

是事如是持。」是名略說界。
Thus the matter is upheld." This is called a brief declaration of boundaries.



聚落界者，如磨頭羅西精舍、聚落精舍，欲共作一布薩界者，應稱名齊三由旬內諸精舍作一羯磨。
Cluster boundaries, such as Môtouluoxi Monastery and Settlement Monastery, if one wishes to create a unified Uposatha boundary, should be named and perform a Kamma together with all the monasteries within a three yojana range.

羯磨者應如是說：「大德僧聽！
The procedure should be stated thus: “Venerable Sangha, listen!

從今日恬精、舍車精舍、勝精舍、不亂精舍、賢精舍、戒次第精舍、螺精舍、酪村精舍、黃精舍等，是諸精舍內界、外界、內外界、中間界。
From today, the monasteries of Tianjing, Sheche, Sheng, Buluan, Xian, Jie Xudi, Luo, Lacun, Huang, and others are the inner, outer, inner-outer, and intermediate boundaries of these monasteries.

若僧時到，僧是諸精舍共作一布薩界，如是白。」
When the time comes for the Sangha, the Sangha will form a single Uposatha boundary for all these monasteries, thus it is declared.”

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
Declare one resolution up to "The Sangha consents, due to silence. Thus, the matter is held."

是名聚落界。
This is called the Cluster Boundary.




說羯磨比丘不知諸精舍名，令舊比丘知名字者，
"Naming the boundaries refers to the procedure in which a motion-making monk who does not know the names of the various monasteries is made aware of them by the senior monks."

僧中唱諸精舍名字已，羯磨者應作是說：
"After the names of the various monasteries are recited among the assembly, the motion-maker should speak thus:"

「大德僧聽！從今日是某甲比丘所說諸精舍名字，
"Noble monks, listen! From today, the names of the monasteries as declared by the monk so-and-so,"

內界、外界、內外界、中間界，是諸精舍共作一布薩界。
"include the inner boundary, outer boundary, inner and outer boundary, and intermediate boundary; these monasteries together form one Uposatha boundary."

若僧時到，僧某甲比丘所說諸精舍名字，共作一布薩界，如是白。
"If the assembly time arrives, the names of the monasteries as declared by the monk so-and-so form one Uposatha boundary, this is stated."

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」是為稱名界。
"Declare one motion: 'The assembly is agreeable and silent, therefore this matter is thus upheld.' This is called naming the boundary."



幖幟界者，作如是言：「大德僧聽！

These boundary markers say: "Venerable monks, listen!

從今日齊幖幟，若石、若山、若井、若埠、若樹、內界、外界、內外界、中間界，作一布薩界。

From today, mark the boundaries, be it stones, mountains, wells, wharfs, trees, interior boundaries, exterior boundaries, internal and external boundaries, or intermediate boundaries, to form one ceremony boundary.

若僧時到，僧齊幖幟，若石、若山、若井、若樹，共作一布薩界，如是白。」

When the time comes for monks, they mark the boundaries with stones, mountains, wells, and trees, to collectively form a ceremony boundary, thus it is declared."

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」

Declare once to the assembly, and thereby, "Monks consent, thus remain silent. This matter is upheld as such."

若羯磨人不知幖幟者，先令舊比丘僧中唱，如上稱名界，說是名幖幟界。

If the person conducting the ceremony does not know the boundary markers, first let an elder monk announce them among the assembly, naming the boundaries as above, stating these are the boundary markers.



隨曲界者，有聚落邊精舍故壞，多有供養眾僧敷具，欲與諸精舍比丘共作一布薩界，修治精舍，共用此物。
For those following the adapted boundary, there are monasteries near the village that are ruined and many items offered to the monks. They wish to create a shared Uposatha boundary with the monks of other monasteries, restore the monasteries, and use these items together.

諸處比丘有欲共者、有不欲共者。
Some monks wish to join together, while others do not.

諸欲共者，應盡來集、若出界去；其不欲者，自當精舍界作標幟住。
Those wishing to join should all come together or leave the boundary; those not wishing to join should mark their own monastery boundary and remain there.

諸欲共者，來集一處已，羯磨者應作是言：「大德僧聽！
Those wishing to join will have gathered in one place, and the one performing the formal act should say: "Noble monks, please listen!

從今日此一住處某甲住處，齊幖幟內界、外界、內外界、中間界，共作一布薩界。
From today, this single place up to Monk A's dwelling, within the marked boundaries, both inner and outer, and the intermediate boundary, together will form one Uposatha boundary.

若僧時到，僧此住處、某甲比丘住處齊幖幟以來共作一布薩界，如是白。
If the time for the monks arrives, the monks from this place and Monk A's dwelling up to the marked boundary will jointly form a Uposatha boundary, thus I declare.

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
After the preliminary motion and one formal act, until "The Sangha agrees, and thus the matter is held."

是名隨曲界。
This is called the adapted boundary.




避難界者，一住處諸比丘，前安居、後安居日已過，有事難起，若賊難、王難、若奪命、若破戒、若水多虫漉不能淨，欲至餘精舍避此諸難，去三由旬內。
In the realm of refuge, when monks at a residence, after the early or late retreat days have passed, face difficulties arising such as thieves, royal threats, life threats, moral transgressions, or water with too many bugs that cannot be purified, and wish to reach another monastery to avoid these troubles within a distance of three yojanas.

若彼有比丘，若呼來、若出界去。
If there is a monk calling or leaving the area.

羯磨者作是說：「大德僧聽！今日是住處彼某甲聚落精舍，內界、外界、內外界、中間界，共作一布薩界。
The formal procedure is stated thus: "Honored monks, listen! Today, at this residence near the village monastery, the inner realm, outer realm, inner-outer realm, and intermediate realm form together as a single Uposatha boundary.

若僧時到，僧從今日是中住處、彼某甲聚落精舍，共作一布薩界，如是白。」
If the time for monks arrives, from today the monks' residence at this named village monastery shall form a single Uposatha boundary, as declared.

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
The declaration is made once, until "The monks consent, therefore they are silent. Thus, this matter is established."

若到彼處，復欲就餘精舍者，當捨先界，應作是說：「大德僧聽！
If upon arriving at that place, one desires to join another monastery, the previous boundary should be abandoned, stating: "Honored monks, listen!

是住處、先住處作別說戒，若僧時到，僧是住處先某住處，作別說戒，如是白。」
This residence separates from the previous residence for the recitation of the precepts; if the time for monks has arrived, this residence at the previous certain residence will separate for precept recitation, as declared."

白一羯磨，乃至「僧忍，默然故。是事如是持。」
The declaration is made once, until "The monks consent, therefore they are silent. Thus, this matter is established."

僧復欲進前精舍者，復取三由旬內，共作一布薩界。
If the monks wish to advance to the previous monastery, again within three yojanas, a Uposatha boundary is collectively made.

復欲進前者，當捨後結前，乃至前求適意住處，如是隨意結、隨意捨，是名避難界。
If one further wishes to advance, the later boundary should be abandoned and the previous one joined, until an agreeable residence is found. Thus, boundaries can be tied and untied at will, known as forming a refuge boundary.



諸方界者，若比丘夏安居中，若諸難起，若王難、若賊難、若奪命難、若破戒、若水多虫漉不可淨，

In all directions, if during the summer retreat a bhikkhu faces any difficulties, whether royal troubles, bandit troubles, life-threatening troubles, disciplinary infractions, or if there are many insects in the water making purification impossible,

隨四方各三由旬內，自在結界，亦如上說。

Within a radius of three yojanas in all directions, they are free to form boundaries as mentioned above.

若難卒至，不得作羯磨，出去無罪。

If a disaster suddenly occurs and they cannot perform the sanghakamma, leaving is without fault.

是名諸方。

This is what is called 'in all directions.'

是謂羯磨界。

This is referred to as 'the realm of sanghakamma.'



遊行界者，

The realm of wanderers,

六十家聚落界、

the realm of sixty family settlements,

隔障界、

the realm of barriers,

樓閣界、

the realm of pavilions,

兩道界、

the realm of two paths,

井界、

the realm of wells,

樹界、

the realm of trees,

園界、

the realm of gardens,

連蔓界、

the realm of intertwined vines,

暫宿界、

the realm of temporary lodging,

船界、

the realm of boats,

舍內界、

the realm within the dwelling,

並界。

and the realm beyond.



六十家聚落界者，如釋迦梨國大聚落、蘇彌國大聚落、摩頭羅國大聚落、巴連弗邑大聚落，是諸聚落各別起屋。
A settlement frontier of sixty households is like the major settlements of the Śākya country, the Sumi country, the Mathurā country, and the Baranāsi town, where each settlement has separate houses.

若比丘置衣在一屋，人在第三屋宿，日光未滅去至明相出時還，尼薩耆。
If a monk places his robes in one house and sleeps in the third house, and returns from sunset up to the sign of morning, he incurs a slight penalty.

日光滅去至明相出還，無罪。
If he returns between sunset and the sign of morning, there is no offense.

日光未滅去、明相未出還，無罪。
If he returns after sunset and before the sign of morning, there is no offense.

一切屋中盡有比丘住者，無罪。
If there is a monk living in each house, there is no offense.

若結界者，無罪。
If he establishes a boundary, there is no offense.

周匝有垣牆者，無罪；周匝有塹者，無罪；周匝有渠水者，無罪；共一門者，無罪。
If there is a surrounding wall, there is no offense; if there is a surrounding ditch, there is no offense; if there is surrounding water, there is no offense; if there is a shared gate, there is no offense.

若道於聚落中過，若比丘衣在道左，身度道右，日光未滅去至明相出，亦如上說。
If he passes through a path in the settlement, and his robe is on the left of the path while his body is on the right, from sunset until the sign of morning, it is as described above.

若比丘道中臥，持三衣枕頭，衣離頭者，尼薩耆。
If a monk sleeps in the path with three robes as a pillow and the robes are separate from the head, he incurs a slight penalty.

以不可截衣故，一切應捨。
As cutting of robes is not allowed, all should be relinquished.

若聚落周匝牆圍遶、若塹、若籬、若一門，門有閉者，皆無罪，是名六十家聚落界。
If there are walls surrounding the settlement, ditches, fences, or a single gate that can be closed, there is no offense, and this is called the frontier of a sixty-household settlement.




隔障界者，亦如是。
Boundaries act as barriers, similarly.




樓閣界者，若梯閣道外，各二十五肘為界，
The boundary of a pavilion is defined as 25 cubits outside the staircase.

若比丘置衣閣上，過二十五肘，
If a monk places his robe on the pavilion above, beyond the 25 cubits,

日光未滅去至明相出還，尼薩耆。
and if the daylight has faded but he returns by dawn, he incurs a minor penalty.

日光滅去、明相出還，無罪；
If the daylight has faded and he returns by dawn, there is no fault;

日光未滅去、明相未出還，無罪。
If the daylight has not faded and he does not return by dawn, there is no fault.

若比丘樓閣上住，畏賊來攻樓閣，
If a monk stays atop the pavilion fearing a bandit attack,

故持衣出樓閣外二十五肘外藏，
and hides his robe 25 cubits outside the pavilion because of it,

還樓閣上宿，日光未滅去至明相出還，
then returns to sleep atop the pavilion and if the daylight has faded but he returns by dawn,

尼薩耆，亦如上說。
he incurs a minor penalty, as explained above.

若比丘夜中大小行，
If a monk walks about during the night,

離衣二十五肘內，與衣合無罪，
within 25 cubits of his robe, and reunites with it, there is no fault.

是名樓閣界。
This is called the boundary of the pavilion.



兩道界者，步道、車道。
There are two types of borders: pedestrian paths and carriage paths.

步道者，有比丘畏寒故至諸暖國，或畏熱故詣諸涼國。
For pedestrian paths, there are monks who, fearing the cold, go to warm countries, or fearing the heat, go to cool countries.

道行時，師與諸伴共行，並論議而去。
When walking along the path, the master walks with companions, discussing as they go.

弟子持衣鉢從後來，不及師。
The disciple carries the robe and bowl, following behind, unable to keep pace with the master.

師至日沒時，畏離衣宿，故出道外待弟子，弟子持衣直過不見師，至天曉相待。
When the master arrives at sunset, fearing to sleep away from his robe, he waits outside the path for the disciple, but the disciple, carrying the robe, passes by without seeing the master, waiting until dawn to meet.

若是師待衣處，離道二十五肘內，與衣合者不犯；過二十五肘外者，尼薩耆。
If the place where the master waits for the robe is within twenty-five elbows from the path, there is no offense when the robe arrives; if it is beyond twenty-five elbows, it is a nissagi offense.

若弟子持衣在前行，日沒時作是念：「莫令我師離衣宿。」
If the disciple carrying the robe walks ahead and thinks at sunset, "I must not let my master sleep without his robe."

即住道外待師行，極眠不覺師過，至曉相問，亦如上說，是名步道。
He then waits outside the path for the master to pass, sleeps deeply not realizing the master has passed, and waits until dawn to ask; this is also as mentioned above, called the pedestrian path.

車道者，比丘與乘車估客共行，置衣車上，畏塵坌故在前去，至日沒時畏離衣宿故，應住道外二十五肘內，令車盡過，與衣合故不犯。
For carriage paths, monks travel with merchant carts, placing their robes on carts, fearing dust, they go ahead, and at sunset, fearing to sleep away from their robes, they should stay within twenty-five elbows outside the path, allowing the carts to pass completely, and there is no offense when reunited with the robe.

若比丘置衣車上，隨車後行，至日沒時不識何者是己衣車？
If a monk places his robe on a cart and follows behind the cart, by sunset, he may not recognize which cart carries his robe.

比丘爾時應去車二十五肘內，繞車營一匝，與衣合故不犯。
At that time, the monk should go within twenty-five elbows of the cart, circle around it once, and there is no offense when reunited with the robe.

若高大車一隥、兩隥、三隥梯上者，比丘置衣車上在下住，從日光未滅至明相出時，尼薩耆，亦如上說。
For high carts with one, two, or three steps up, if the monk places his robe on the cart and stays below, from sunset until dawn, it is a nissagi offense, as mentioned above.

若於夜中暫內手車上者，不犯。
If during the night one temporarily puts a hand on the cart, it is not an offense.

若比丘在車上宿，置衣車下、若在車前置衣車後、若在車後置衣車前、若在車左置衣車右、若在車右置衣車左、日光未滅至明相出時，皆尼薩耆。
If a monk sleeps on the cart, placing the robe below, or if in front places it behind, or behind places it in front, or on the left places it on the right, or on the right places it on the left, from sunset until dawn, all are nissagi offenses.

若比丘置衣車上，離車二十五肘外靜處宿者，日光未滅去至明相出時還，尼薩耆，亦如上說。
If a monk places the robe on the cart and sleeps at a quiet place more than twenty-five elbows away, from sunset until dawn when returning, it is a nissagi offense, as mentioned above.

若比丘畏賊故，於車外過二十五肘藏衣，還車上宿，日光未滅至明相出時，尼薩耆，亦如上說。
If a monk, fearing thieves, hides the robe more than twenty-five elbows away from the cart and returns to sleep on the cart, from sunset until dawn, it is a nissagi offense, as mentioned above.

若夜中起大小行，離衣二十五肘內，與衣合無罪。
If one gets up in the middle of the night for short or long walks, staying within twenty-five elbows of the robe, there is no offense when reunited with it.

若車營內以長繩橫斷，為繫牛故，比丘於繩一邊住，置衣繩一邊，日光未滅至明相出時，尼薩耆，亦如上說，是名兩道界。
If within the cart camp a long rope is tied across to tether the oxen, and the monk stays on one side of the rope, placing the robe on the other side, from sunset until dawn, it is a nissagi offense, as mentioned above. This defines the two types of borders.




井界者，比丘與估客共行，於井邊宿，井欄外二十五肘內，名為井界。
The well boundary refers to where a monk and a trader travel together, staying by the well, within twenty-five cubits outside the well railing, this is called the well boundary.

衣著井欄上，比丘去井過二十五肘，日光未滅去至明相出時，尼薩耆，亦如上說。
Placing garments on the well railing, if the monk goes beyond twenty-five cubits away from the well when the sun has not yet set and until dawn appears, it is a violation, as mentioned above.

若畏賊故，藏衣井外過二十五肘，來井邊宿，日光未滅去至明相出時還，尼薩耆。
If fearing thieves, one hides garments beyond twenty-five cubits outside the well and comes to stay by the well, and returns when the sun has not yet set until dawn appears, it is a violation.

若藏衣井半龕中，於井上宿，日光未滅去至明相出時，尼薩耆。
If garments are hidden in a niche of the half of the well and one stays above the well, and it is between the time the sun has not yet set until dawn appears, it is a violation.

若繩連衣著身宿者，不犯。
If one stays with garments tied to their body by a rope, it is not an offense.

置衣井底、於井上宿，置衣井上、井底宿，亦復如是。
Placing garments at the bottom of the well and staying above the well, or placing garments above and staying at the bottom of the well, is likewise a violation.

若夜暫垂手脚井中，與衣合者無罪，是名井界。
If at night one temporarily hangs their hands and feet into the well, it is no offense if they are touching garments; this is called the well boundary.




樹界者，於樹一切枝葉外二十五肘為樹界。
The boundary of the tree is set at twenty-five cubits beyond all its branches and leaves.

若比丘置衣樹下，過二十五肘外，日光未滅去至明相出，應如上說。
If a monk places a robe under a tree, going beyond twenty-five cubits, travels until night falls and returns with the first light, the rule applies as stated above.

若比丘樹下，畏賊藏衣樹外過二十五肘，日光未滅去至明相出時還，尼薩耆。
If a monk hides a robe beyond twenty-five cubits under a tree out of fear of thieves, and returns from sunset to dawn, it is a transgression.

日光未滅去至明相未出還，不犯；日光滅去至明相出還，不犯。
If he returns before sunset or after dawn, it is not an offense.

若夜中暫到衣所，與衣合不犯。
If during the night he briefly goes to where the robe is and reunites with it, it is not an offense.

若置衣樹上、樹下宿，若置衣樹下、樹上宿，日光未滅去至明相出時，尼薩耆。
If he places the robe on the tree and stays under it or places it under and stays on the tree, travels from sunset to dawn, it is a transgression.

若繩連著身者無罪，是名樹界。
If a rope is fastened to the body, there is no offense, this is called the tree boundary.

園界亦如是。
The garden boundary is the same.




若蒲萄蔓架、不破蔓架、不樓藤蔓架、瓠蔓架、解脫花蔓架，如是一切蔓架外各二十五肘，名為連蔓界。  
The border of the vine is defined as the limits extending twenty-five cubits beyond vine arbors such as grape arbors, unbroken arbors, towered vine arbors, gourd arbors, or liberating flower arbors.

比丘與估客共道行，至此蔓下宿，比丘求靜處，置衣蔓架底，出二十五肘外，日光未滅去、明相出時還，尼薩耆。  
A monk travels with traders and lodges under the vine; the monk seeks a quiet place, places his robes under the vine arbor, and goes beyond twenty-five cubits until he returns at dawn or when the daylight appears, which is called Nissaggiya.

日光滅去、明相出還，無罪；日光未滅去至明相未出還，無罪。  
When the daylight disappears and he returns when the light reappears, it is blameless; from the time the daylight disappears to reappearance, it is blameless.

若畏賊故藏衣二十五肘外，於蔓架底宿，日光未滅去至明相出時，如上說。  
If out of fear of thieves, he hides his robes beyond twenty-five cubits and lodges under the vine arbor, from the time the daylight disappears until the reappearance, as mentioned above.

若夜中大小行暫到衣所，與衣合無罪。  
If during the night he briefly visits the place of his robes and reunites with his garment, it is blameless.

若著衣蔓架上、在下宿，著衣蔓下、在上宿，亦復如是。  
If he places a robe on the vine arbor and lodges beneath or places it beneath and lodges above, it is also blameless.

若繩連身者無罪。是名連蔓界。  
If a rope ties him, it is blameless. This is called the border of the vine.



暫宿界者，客舍中種種雜人，比丘於中止宿。
The temporary dwelling is a hostel with various people, and monks stay there.

客舍主言：「此中畏賊，各自警備。」
The hostel keeper said, "There are fears of robbers here, so everyone should be vigilant."

比丘問客舍主言：「長壽！何處牢固？」
The monk asked the hostel keeper, "Long Life! Where is it secure?"

客舍主答言：「閣上牢固。」
The hostel keeper replied, "The upper loft is secure."

或言：「閣下牢固。」
Or said, "The lower loft is secure."

比丘藏衣閣下、於閣上宿，或置衣閣上、於閣下宿，日光未滅去至明相出時還，皆尼薩耆，如上說。
The monk stored clothes in the lower loft and stayed in the upper loft, or placed clothes in the upper loft and stayed in the lower loft, and before the sunlight fades to going out when the surroundings brighten, it is a minor offense as mentioned above.

若是中梯隥道通者，不犯。
If there is a connected staircase or passage, it is not an offense.

若比丘道行至天祠中宿，天祠主言：「此中畏賊盜，各自守備。」
If a monk is traveling and stays in a temple, the temple keeper says, "There are robbers here, so everyone should guard themselves."

比丘問：「天祠主！何處牢固？」
The monk asked, "Temple keeper! Where is it secure?"

天祠主言：「若舍裏牢固、若舍外牢固。」
The temple keeper said, "Inside the building is secure, and outside the building is secure."

比丘便置衣舍內，自於舍外頭，首向戶而臥，日光未滅去至明相出時，尼薩耆，如上說。
The monk then placed clothes inside and slept outside with his head towards the door, and before the sunlight fades to going out when surroundings brighten, it is a minor offense as mentioned above.

若戶鉤在比丘邊者不犯。
If the door hook is on the monk's side, it is not an offense.

比丘道行於空聚落中宿，置衣第一房，自於第三房宿者，日光未滅去至明相出，如上說。
A monk traveling and staying in an empty settlement, placing clothes in the first room, and sleeping in the third room, before the sunlight fades to going out when surroundings brighten, as mentioned above.

若一切房盡有比丘者，不犯。
If all rooms are occupied by monks, it is not an offense.

若羯磨作界，若籬牆、溝渠圍繞，若水圍遶者，不犯。
If the boundary is made through a communal action, or if surrounded by fences, ditches, or water, it is not an offense.

是名暫宿界。
This is called the temporary dwelling boundary.




比丘載船上水、下水，船上有眾多住處。

The realm of the ship is when monks board a ship on the water and there are many places to stay on the ship.

若比丘住處、若外道住處，比丘住處不牢密故，持衣寄外道住處，日光未滅去至明相出時還，尼薩耆，亦如上說。

If a monk's dwelling or a non-Buddhist's dwelling is not secure, he may leave his robe in a non-Buddhist's dwelling and return before dawn; this is also as said above.

若外道聽自在置衣物者，不犯。

If the non-Buddhist allows the monk to place items freely, there is no offense.

若船著岸者，比丘置衣船上，離船過二十五肘外，日光未滅至明相出時，如上說。

If the ship is docked at the shore, and the monk places his robe on the ship and then goes twenty-five cubits away, he should return before dawn as mentioned above.

若船上畏賊，持衣上岸二十五肘外藏，還船上宿，日光未滅至明相出時，尼薩耆。

If fearing thieves on the ship, he may hide his robe twenty-five cubits onshore and return to sleep on the ship, and he should return before dawn.

夜中大小行暫詣衣所者，與衣合不犯。

If he temporarily visits the place where the robe is at night, there is no offense if he takes it.

若比丘浣衣，於船上曬，風鼓衣盡外向，經宿者尼薩耆。

If a monk washes his robe and spreads it on the ship for drying, and the wind blows it outward and it remains overnight, it is an offense.

若夜中風吹衣暫入船內者，不犯。

If the wind blows the robe into the ship at night temporarily, there is no offense.

若曬衣時，半在船內、半在船外者，尼薩耆，不可截故盡捨，是名船界。

If while drying, half of the robe is inside and half is outside the ship, it is an offense and must be relinquished as it cannot be divided; this is called the realm of the ship.




家內界者，若兄弟二人共一家住，於家中別作分齊。
The boundaries within a house refer to when two brothers live together in one house and set separate divisions within it.

若兄不聽弟入、弟不聽兄入，若比丘在兄分齊內、衣在弟分齊內，日光未沒至明相出者，如上說。
If the elder brother does not allow the younger brother to enter, and vice versa, and a monk is within the elder brother's division while his robes are in the younger brother's division, from sunset till dawn it is as previously stated.

若兄弟語比丘言：「俗人自違，於法不礙，任意住止。」者，爾時隨意置衣，無罪。
If the brothers tell the monk, "Laypeople differ in their ways; it doesn't hinder the Dharma, feel free to stay," then he may place his robes as he wishes without fault.

若比丘至白衣家宿，畏賊故，問白衣：「何處牢固？」
If a monk visits a layperson's house to stay overnight out of fear of thieves, he asks the layperson, "Where is it secure?"

答言：「舍內牢固。」比丘置衣舍內，於舍外宿，日光未滅至明相出時，如上說。
If the answer is "Inside the house is secure," and the monk places his robes inside the house yet sleeps outside, from sunset till dawn it is as previously stated.

若夜於孔中暫內一手屋內者，不犯。
If during the night he places a hand inside through a hole, there is no offense.

是名家內界。
This is called the boundary within a house.




並界者，若四聚落界相接，

Boundary case, if the boundaries of four settlements connect,

比丘衣枕頭臥，

A monk lies with his head on clothes,

比丘頭在一界，兩手各在一界，脚在一界，衣在頭底，

The monk's head is in one boundary, his hands each in one boundary, his feet in one boundary, with clothes under his head,

衣離頭者，尼薩耆。

If the clothes leave the head, it is an offense.

若夜中手脚暫到衣所者，不犯。

If the hands or feet temporarily reach the clothes at night, it is not an offense.

若車於此四界上住，

If a cart is stationed on these four boundaries,

車軛在一界、車後在一界、左輪在一界、右輪在一界，

The cart's yoke is in one boundary, the back of the cart in one boundary, the left wheel in one boundary, the right wheel in one boundary,

若置衣車前、車後宿，

If clothes are placed in front of the cart and slept,

置衣車後、車前宿，

If clothes are placed behind the cart and slept,

置衣車左、車右宿，

If clothes are placed to the left of the cart and slept,

置衣車右、車左宿，

If clothes are placed to the right of the cart and slept,

日光未滅去至明相出時，尼薩耆；

If the sunlight has not yet disappeared until dawn, it is an offense;

日光滅已去至明相出時還，不犯；

If the sunlight has disappeared until dawn and they return, it is not an offense;

日光未滅去至明相未出還，不犯。

If the sunlight has not yet disappeared and they return before dawn, it is not an offense.

是名並界。

This is called the boundary case.




聚落界者，若比丘著上下衣入聚落，有主人語比丘言：「我今夜欲供養形像作福德，比丘當助我料理之。」
Regarding the village boundary, if a monk enters a village wearing the upper and lower garments, and a host says to the monk, "Tonight I wish to offer to the image and create merit, the monk should assist me in arranging it."

是比丘即助莊嚴形像，懸繒花蓋敷置床座，至日沒時比丘報主人言：「日暮還精舍。」
The monk immediately helps in decorating the image, hanging banners and floral canopies and setting up bed seats. When the sun sets, the monk tells the host, "I will return to the monastery at dusk."

是主人慇懃留比丘宿，若彼住處諸比丘有長衣者，應暫借受持。
The host earnestly retains the monk to stay overnight. If there is a monk at that place who has an extra robe, it should temporarily be borrowed for use.

若無者，隨近有諸比丘住處者，應從彼借。
If there isn't one, and there are monks living nearby, one should borrow from them.

若無比丘，有比丘尼住處者，亦從彼借。
If there are no monks, but there are nunneries nearby, one should also borrow from them.

若無者，是處俗人若有衣被者，應從借作淨，安施紐，然後受持。
If there are none, from laypeople in that place who have clothing, one should borrow, make it clean and usable, and then accept it for use.

若無是事，後夜分城門開者，當疾還寺，莫踰城出。
If none of this is possible, and the city gates open in the latter part of the night, one should quickly return to the monastery but not go out beyond the city boundaries.

到精舍，門猶未開者，當索開門。
Upon reaching the monastery, if the door isn't open, one should ask for it to be opened.

若不得開者，應住門屋底。
If it cannot be opened, one should stay under the door eaves.

若無門屋者，應內手著孔中。
If there are no door eaves, one should insert a hand into a gap.

孔有二種，若門孔、若水瀆孔。
There are two types of gaps, those in doors and those in water drains.

若門無孔者，於水瀆孔中、若內手、若內脚，莫先內手脚，脫有蛇蝮應先以杖驚之，然後內手與衣合。
If the door has no gap, in a gap of a water drain, whether inserting the hand or the foot, do not first insert the hand or foot. In case there is a snake, first scare it away with a stick, then insert the hand along with the robe.

若無水瀆者，應踰垣牆入，應作相令內人識，莫令內人疑是賊，相驚動也。
If there is no water drain, one should climb over the wall and enter and should make a sign for those inside to recognize so that they do not suspect a thief and cause alarm.

若不得入者，當疾捨衣，寧無衣犯越比尼罪，以輕易重故。
If entry is not possible, one should quickly abandon the robe, as it's better to be without it than to commit a graver offense by transgressing a rule.

若比丘於精舍內浣衣，懸當垣牆上曬。
If a monk washes the robe inside the monastery and hangs it on a wall to dry.

若夜風吹出垂著垣牆外者，犯尼薩耆。
If the wind blows it out at night so that it hangs outside the wall, it's an offense.

在內者不犯，以不可截故盡應捨。
If it's inside, there is no offense since it cannot be cut off, it should be entirely given up.

若比丘於精舍外脫衣，熱作忘衣在外，夜憶即出求之不見。
If a monk takes off the robe outside the monastery, because of the heat, and forgets it outside, remembers at night, and goes to look for it but does not see it.

晨朝出看，見衣去夜行迹二十五肘內者，不犯；二十五肘外者，尼薩耆。
In the morning, checking and sees the robe within twenty-five cubits of last night's path, there's no offense; beyond twenty-five cubits, it's an offense.

是名聚落界。
This is called the village boundary.



七菴婆羅樹界者，佛在舍衛城，時有一婆羅門，能種菴婆羅樹。
In the realm of the seven Amra trees, the Buddha resided in Shravasti city, at that time there was a Brahmin who was capable of planting Amra trees.

是婆羅門聞沙門瞿曇在舍衛城，具足一切知見，有所問者皆能記說，作是思惟：
This Brahmin heard that the ascetic Gautama in Shravasti city was fully knowledgeable and could answer any question, so he thought:

「我今當往問種菴婆羅樹法，云何種菴婆羅樹，能使根莖堅固枝葉茂盛，花果成就扶踈生長，不相妨礙？」
"I should now go and ask how to plant the Amra tree, and how to make its roots and stems firm, its branches and leaves luxuriant, and its flowers and fruits flourish without hindrance."

作是念已，詣世尊所，共相問訊已，於一面坐，白世尊言：
With this thought, he went to the World-Honored One, exchanged greetings, sat to one side, and said to the World-Honored One:

「沙門瞿曇！云何方便種菴婆羅樹，能使根莖堅固枝葉茂盛，花果成就扶踈生長，不相妨礙？」
"Ascetic Gautama! How can one skillfully plant the Amra tree so that its roots and trunks are strong and its branches and leaves are luxuriant, allowing its flowers and fruits to flourish without obstruction?"

時世尊告婆羅門言：
At that time, the World-Honored One said to the Brahmin:

「以五肘弓量七弓種一樹，如是種者，能令彼樹根莖堅固枝葉茂盛，花果成就扶踈生長，各各不相妨礙。」
"By measuring five bow lengths and planting one tree at seven bow intervals, such planting can ensure the roots and stems are firm, the branches and leaves are thriving, and the flowers and fruits develop fully without interfering with each other."

時婆羅門歡喜，便作是言：
The Brahmin was delighted and said:

「善哉！沙門瞿曇，知種殖法，真一切智。」
"Wonderful! Ascetic Gautama, you know the method of planting, truly omniscient."

從坐起而去。婆羅門去不久，佛告諸比丘：
He got up from his seat and left. Not long after the Brahmin left, the Buddha told the monks:

「是婆羅門今大有所失，應問者不問，不應問者問。若彼問苦習義者，可得道迹。
"This Brahmin has made a great mistake today; he did not ask what should be asked and asked what should not be. If he had inquired about the meaning of suffering and its practice, he could have attained the path."

雖然，彼婆羅門今於我所發歡喜心，亦為大有所得。」
However, the joy that Brahmin has developed towards me is also a great gain for him."

爾時優波離知時而白佛言：
Then, Upali perceived the occasion and said to the Buddha:

「世尊！已聞菴婆羅樹分齊，今復請問：
"World-Honored One! Having heard about the measurements concerning the Amra tree, I now again ask:

若有處所城邑聚落界分，不可知者。若欲羯磨，應齊幾許，名為善作羯磨？
If there is a place or boundary between villages or cities that is unclear, how far should one measure for the sake of holding a Sangha act, to ensure it is properly done?

使令異眾僧各各相見而得成就羯磨，不犯別眾耶？」
How can different assemblies of monks be made to meet without violating separate assemblies in performing the Sangha act?"

佛告優波離：
The Buddha told Upali:

「五肘弓量七弓種一菴婆羅樹，齊七菴婆羅樹，相去爾所作羯磨者，名善作羯磨。
"By measuring five bow lengths and planting one Amra tree at seven bow intervals, performing the Sangha act within this range is called properly conducting the Sangha act."

雖異眾相見而無別眾之罪，是名為七菴婆羅樹界。」
Even though different assemblies meet, it does not constitute a fault of separate assemblies; this is called the realm of the seven Amra trees."

若比丘離衣宿已，應白持律能羯磨者，言：
If a monk stays separated from his robe, he should tell those skilled in discipline capable of performing the Sangha act:

「長老！我與是衣別宿，應捨。長老！為我作羯磨。」
"Elder! I stayed separately from this robe, it should be relinquished. Elder! Please perform the Sangha act for me."

羯磨法如上過十日衣中說。
The method of the Sangha act is as explained above in the section on the robe exceeding ten days.

是故說：「若比丘衣已竟，迦絺那衣已捨，若三衣中，若離一一衣餘處宿，除僧羯磨，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Therefore it is said, "If a monk's robe is completed, the Kathina robe is relinquished, if he stays apart from any of the three robes elsewhere without the Sangha act, it is a Niḥsargika Pācittika offense."



，廣說如上。  
The Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, expounding as above.

爾時尊者阿那律於阿耆羅河邊住，得一小段衣，與眾多比丘俱，詣阿耆羅河邊水灑引令長廣。  
At that time, the Venerable Aniruddha was residing by the Ajiravati River, obtaining a small piece of cloth, and with many monks, he went to the river to wet and stretch it.

爾時世尊於自住處沒，當阿耆羅河邊現。  
Then the World-Honored One disappeared from his own dwelling place and manifested by the Ajiravati River.

知而故問阿那律：「汝作何等？」  
Knowing this, he purposefully asked Aniruddha, "What are you doing?"

答言：「世尊！得一小段衣，尺量不足，欲引令長廣。」  
He replied, "World-Honored One! I obtained a small piece of cloth, and it is not enough in length and breadth, so I want to stretch it."

佛語阿那律：「汝頗有更得衣望處不？」  
The Buddha said to Aniruddha, "Do you have any other source where you can obtain more cloth?"

答言：「有。」  
He replied, "Yes."

世尊問：「何時可得？」  
The World-Honored One asked, "When can you get it?"

答言：「一月。」  
He replied, "In one month."

佛言：「從今日聽不足衣有衣望處者，停至一月為滿足故。」  
The Buddha said, "From today, if you do not have enough cloth, and you have a source to obtain it, you are allowed to wait for up to one month to complete it."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘盡集，乃至已聞者當重聞。  
The Buddha told the monks, "All monks residing in Shravasti should gather; even those who have heard this before should hear it again.

若比丘衣已竟，迦絺那衣已捨。  
If a monk's robe is completed, and the Kathina robe has already been relinquished,

若得非時衣，比丘須衣應取，疾作衣受。  
If they receive out-of-season cloth, a monk in need of a robe should take it and quickly make it into a robe to receive.

若不足者，有望處為滿故，聽一月畜。  
If it is insufficient, and there is a source to obtain it in full, they are allowed to store it for one month.

若過畜者，足不足，尼薩耆波夜提。」  
If they exceed storing it, whether it is sufficient or not, it is an offense requiring confession and forfeiture.


衣竟者，三衣已成，亦名衣竟。
Completion of robes means that the three robes are completed, also known as garment completion.

不受迦絺那衣，亦名衣竟；
Not receiving the kāṣāya robe is also called garment completion;

已捨迦絺那衣，亦名衣竟。
Already forsaking the kāṣāya robe is also called garment completion.

浣染竟，亦名衣竟。
Washing and dyeing completed, also called garment completion.



已捨迦絺那衣者，有十事捨，如上說。
For one who has abandoned the patchwork robe, there are ten reasons for abandonment, as stated above.




得者，若男、若女、在家、出家人邊得衣也。
Those who receive, whether male or female, whether laypeople or monastics, receive clothing.




非時者，若受迦絺那衣，有七月名非時；

An untimely season is when having accepted the kaṭhina robe, there are seven months called untimely;

若不受迦絺那衣者，有十一月是名非時。

If not having accepted the kaṭhina robe, there are eleven months called untimely.

於此非時中得衣，是名非時衣。

Obtaining a robe during this untimely season is called an untimely robe.




如上所述，衣服指的是衣物。

As mentioned above, "yi" refers to clothing.




須者，是比丘實須衣也。

'Needing' means that the monk truly needs the robe.




即取疾成受

Receive quickly

持作而少不足者

Hold to act but a little is insufficient

停至一月

Stop until one month

一月者三十日

A month is thirty days

齊是應畜

Aligned in response to storage

為求滿足故

In order to seek fulfillment



有望者，是比丘實聞有得衣處，待令滿足，得至一月畜。
For one who desires, when the monk truly hears there is a place to obtain a robe, he waits for it to be sufficient, and can keep it for up to a month.

過是一月畜者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If it exceeds a month, it involves a nissaggiya pācittiya.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是衣應僧中捨，波夜提懺悔；

Nisagghiya pacittiya means that this robe should be given up in the assembly, and it is a pacittiya offense.

不捨而悔，犯越比尼罪。

If not given up and the offense confessed, it results in a breach of the Vinaya rules.

波夜提者，如上說。

Pacittiya, as mentioned above.



若比丘前十日得有望衣，無望衣、微小望衣、無力望、羸望。
If a monk anticipates receiving a robe in the first ten days, having no robe, a slight expectation of a robe, a weak expectation, or a poor expectation.

因生望、斷望、更起餘望，此皆無事停。
Due to expectation arising, expectation ceasing, or reawakening other expectations, all these are settled without affair.

若得此衣滿足已，半作淨、半不作淨，是中作淨者，名善作淨；不作淨者，過十日尼薩耆。
If he receives this robe and completes it, making half pure and half not pure, the part made pure is called well purified; if not purified, after ten days, Nissaggiya.

若比丘於前十日中，若得居士衣、若糞掃衣，不自作不教作、不受持不作淨，彼衣若作、若不作，衣及衣餘前十日過，尼薩耆。
If within the first ten days a monk receives a layperson's robe or a washed robe, not making it himself or instructing others to make it, not wearing it or purifying it, whether the robe is made or not, after ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘前十日中得衣，若故衣、若納衣，是比丘得已，不自作不教作，乃至過前十日者，尼薩耆。
If within the first ten days a monk receives a robe, whether an old robe or a new robe, and having received it does not make it himself or instruct others to make it, after ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘中十日中得衣，若以染淨、若未淨，是比丘得是衣，不自作不教作、不受持不作淨，彼若作衣、若不作，衣及衣餘中十日過，尼薩耆。
If during the middle ten days a monk receives a robe, whether cleanly dyed or not yet clean, and having received the robe does not make it himself or instruct others to make it or wear it or purify it, whether the robe is made or not, after the middle ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘中十日得衣，若得應法衣、不應法衣，取已不自作不教作，乃至過中十日，尼薩耆。
If during the middle ten days a monk receives a robe, whether an appropriate robe or an inappropriate one, having taken it and not making it himself or instructing others to make it, after the middle ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘後十日中得衣，應作一衣而欲作二衣，餘比丘語是比丘言：「長老！是先欲作一衣，今何故作二衣？今應如先作一衣。」
If during the last ten days a monk receives a robe and intends to make one robe but desires to make two, other monks say to this monk, "Elder! You first intended to make one robe, why now make two? Now you should make one robe as initially intended."

是比丘得衣已，不自作不教作，乃至過後十日，尼薩耆。
Having received the robe, and not making it himself or instructing others to make it, after the last ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘後十日中得衣，欲作小割截衣，而作大割截衣，餘比丘語是比丘言：「長老！本欲作小割截衣，今何以作大割截衣？應如本作。」
If during the last ten days a monk receives a robe, intending to make a small patchwork robe but instead makes a large patchwork robe, other monks say to this monk, "Elder! You initially intended to make a small patchwork robe, why now make a large one? You should make as originally intended."

是比丘得衣，不自作不教作、不受持不作淨，若作、若不作，衣及衣餘過後十日，尼薩耆。
Having received the robe, not making it himself or instructing others to make it or wearing it or purifying it, whether made or not, after the last ten days have passed, Nissaggiya.

若比丘前十日得衣，應即前十日作，中十日得衣，應即中十日作，後十日得衣，應即後十日作。
If a monk receives a robe in the first ten days, he should make it within those ten days; if received in the middle ten days, make it within the middle ten days; if received in the last ten days, make it within the last ten days.

若比丘前十日，五日已過得望衣；前十日中、後五日；中十日、前五日，此十日應作衣。
If during the first ten days, five days have passed upon receiving the anticipated robe; within the first ten days, five days after; during the middle ten days, five days before, he should make the robe within these ten days.

若比丘中十日、前五日已過得望衣，應中十日後五日、後十日前五日，此十日應作衣。
If during the middle ten days, five days have passed before receiving the anticipated robe, he should make the robe in the last five days of the middle ten days, and the first five days of the last ten days.

若比丘後十日前五日已過得望衣，即應此五日中應作衣。
If five days have passed before receiving the anticipated robe during the last ten days, he should make the robe within those five days.

若比丘後十日中六日已過得望衣，應四日中作。
If six days have passed before receiving the anticipated robe during the last ten days, he should make it within four days.

七日已過得衣，三日應作。
If seven days have passed receiving the robe, he should make it within three days.

八日已過得衣，二日應作。
If eight days have passed receiving the robe, he should make it within two days.

九日已過得衣，一日應作。
If nine days have passed receiving the robe, he should make it within one day.

十日得衣即日應作。
If received on the tenth day, he should make it on that day.

作衣時應餘人相助，浣染牽截絣篸却刺，刺橫刺長，刺緣施紐煮染染衣，作淨已受持。
When making the robe, others should help with washing, dyeing, cutting, sewing, stitching, stitching horizontally and vertically, sewing edges, adding fastenings, boiling, dyeing the robe, and purifying it before wearing.

若一日恐不竟者，麁行隱令竟，受持後更細刺。
If he fears it will not be completed in one day, he should do rough stitching secretly to finish, and after wearing it, refine the stitching.

是故世尊說：「若比丘衣已竟，迦絺那衣已捨，乃至足不足，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Therefore, the Blessed One said: "If a monk's robe is finished, the kāṭhina robe is laid aside, whether sufficient or insufficient, Nissaggiya Pācittiya."




，廣說如上。  
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, speaking extensively as above.

優鉢羅比丘尼因緣應廣說，時優鉢羅比丘尼，以僧祇支與尊者阿難陀，是衣垢膩不淨。  
The circumstances concerning the nun Upalavanna should be elaborated upon; at that time, she gave dirty and greasy robes to Venerable Ananda.

阿難陀持是衣，泥塗日中曬，佛知而故問：「阿難陀！汝作何等？」  
Ananda took these clothes, soiled them with mud, and dried them in the sun. The Buddha, knowing this, purposely asked, "Ananda! What are you doing?"

答言：「世尊！是優鉢羅比丘尼與我此僧祇支垢膩不淨，泥塗而曬。」  
He replied, "World-Honored One! Upalavanna the nun gave me these filthy and greasy robes, and I soiled and dried them."

佛問阿難陀：「汝與直貿易不？」  
The Buddha asked Ananda, "Will you exchange them directly?"

答言：「不與。世尊！」  
He replied, "I will not, World-Honored One!"

佛告阿難陀：「應當與貿易，母人少利。」  
The Buddha told Ananda, "You should exchange them; do not let it be of little benefit to people."

阿難陀不欲與，佛語阿難陀：「何以不與？」  
Ananda did not want to give them, so the Buddha asked Ananda, "Why are you not willing to give them?"

阿難陀白佛：「與何物？」  
Ananda replied to the Buddha, "What should I give?"

佛語阿難陀：「王波斯匿所施劫貝，長十六肘廣八肘者與之。」  
The Buddha told Ananda, "Give her the robe donated by King Prasenajit, which is sixteen cubits long and eight cubits wide."

阿難陀猶故不與，如《劫貝契經》廣說。  
Ananda still refused to give them, as is explained in detail in the "Kalpa Banner Sutra."


卫城，广说如上。  
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and broadly preached as stated above.

时善生比丘尼将徒众皆着弊坏衣，礼世尊足。  
At that time, the nun Shansheng, along with her followers, all wore worn-out clothes and paid homage at the feet of the World-Honored One.

佛知而故问：「诸比丘！此何等比丘尼，着弊坏衣而来诣我？」  
The Buddha, knowing this, deliberately asked, "Monks, what kind of nun is this who comes to me wearing tattered garments?"

诸比丘白佛言：「世尊！此是善生比丘尼。」  
The monks replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, this is the nun Shansheng."

佛 问诸比丘：「是善生比丘尼为得衣故不着？为无衣耶？」  
The Buddha asked the monks, "Does this nun Shansheng have clothes and choose not to wear them, or does she have no clothes?"

诸比丘言：「但得，已持与优陀夷。」  
The monks said, "She has them but has given them to Uttararāma."



衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti, and he taught extensively as mentioned above.

時偷蘭難陀比丘尼將徒眾，皆著弊壞衣來詣世尊，頭面禮足。
At that time, the nun Sundari Nanda, along with her followers, all wearing worn-out robes, came to visit the World Honored One and bowed at his feet.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「此何等比丘尼，著弊壞衣而來詣我？」
The Buddha, knowing this, deliberately asked the monks, "Who is this nun wearing tattered robes and coming to see me?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！此是偷蘭難陀比丘尼。」
The monks replied to the Buddha, "World Honored One! This is the nun Sundari Nanda."

佛問諸比丘：「是偷蘭難陀比丘尼，為得衣故不著？為不得衣故不著。」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Is it because Sundari Nanda has clothes that she does not wear new ones, or is it because she does not have new clothes?"

諸比丘言：「但得，已持施阿難陀。」
The monks said, "She does have clothes, but she has already given them to Ananda."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。  
Again, the Buddha stayed at Shravasti and spoke extensively as before.

時蘇毘提比丘尼將徒眾，皆著弊壞衣來詣世尊，頭面禮足。  
At that time, the nun Subhuti led her followers, all wearing worn-out clothes, to pay respects to the World-Honored One by bowing at his feet.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「此何等比丘尼，著弊壞衣而來詣我？」  
The Buddha, knowing this, intentionally asked the monks: "Who is this nun wearing worn-out clothes and coming to see me?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！此是蘇毘提比丘尼。」  
The monks replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, this is the nun Subhuti."

佛問諸比丘：「是蘇毘提比丘尼為得衣不著？為不得衣耶？」  
The Buddha asked the monks, "Did the nun Subhuti receive clothes and choose not to wear them, or did she not receive clothes?"

諸比丘言：「但得，已持施善解比丘。」  
The monks said, "She has received them but has already given them to the virtuous monks."




衛城，廣說如上。
Again, the Buddha stayed in Shravasti City, and he explained in detail as above.

有失利摩比丘尼將徒眾，皆著弊壞衣來詣世尊，頭面禮足。
There was a nun named Shilima who led her followers, all wearing worn-out robes, to see the World Honored One and bowed at his feet.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「此何等比丘尼，著弊壞衣來詣我所？」
The Buddha, knowing, intentionally asked the monks, "Who is this nun, wearing such worn-out clothing, coming to me?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！此是失利摩比丘尼。」
The monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! This is the nun Shilima."

佛問諸比丘：「是失利摩比丘尼，為得衣不著？為不得衣耶？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Does this nun Shilima not have clothes to wear, or does she not obtain them?"

諸比丘言：「但得，已持施僧。」
The monks replied, "She does obtain clothes but gives them away to the monks."

佛問諸比丘：「若親里比丘尼著如是弊壞衣者，是親里比丘應取彼衣不？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "If a nun related to a monk wears such worn-out clothing, should that monk take clothing from her?"

答言：「不取。」
They answered, "No, he should not take it."

世尊復問：「若親里比丘尼自衣弊壞，持衣物與親里比丘不？」
The World Honored One asked again, "If a nun related to a monk has her own clothing worn out, should she give clothing to the related monk?"

答言：「不也。世尊！」
They answered, "No, World Honored One!"

佛言：「是故比丘！不應從非親里比丘尼邊取衣，除貿易。」
The Buddha said, "Therefore, monks, you should not take clothing from a nun who is not a relative, except in exchange."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All monks residing in Shravasti City should gather; for the benefit of ten reasons, rules should be established for them, such that even those who have heard should hear again."

若比丘從非親里比丘尼取衣，除貿易，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk takes clothing from a nun who is not a relative, except for exchange, it is a fault that requires confession and expiation


比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, as mentioned above.




非親里比丘尼者，非父親相續、非母親相續，是名非親里比丘尼。
A nun not belonging to the kin lineage, neither from the father’s lineage nor the mother’s lineage, is called a non-kin lineage nun.

一親里、多非親里，多親里、一非親里，沙彌尼親里、比丘尼非親里，沙彌尼非親里、比丘尼親里，是中得衣，犯；
One kin, many non-kin; many kin, one non-kin; novice nun kin, nun non-kin; novice nun non-kin, nun kin; obtaining cloth among these is an offense.

離此二眾，無罪。
Apart from these two groups, there is no offense.




衣者：欽婆羅衣、

Clothing, that is the Kumalambara robes,

劫貝衣、

Kaupina clothing,

憍舍耶衣、

Kashaya robes,

芻摩衣、

Choma clothing,

舍那衣、

Shana robes,

麻衣、

Hemp clothing,

軀物提衣。

Uttara-sangha robes.



取者，受彼施也。
The taker is the one who receives what the other gives.




除贸易者，佛说若贸易无罪。
Except for traders, Buddha says there is no sin in trading.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是衣應僧中捨，波夜提，懺悔。
Nissaggiya pacittiya means that this robe should be relinquished among the Sangha; pacittiya involves confession.

不捨衣而悔者，得越比尼罪。
If one doesn't relinquish the robe and confesses, it constitutes a breach of the monastic code.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pacittiya, as explained above.



非親里比丘尼，自與使受、使與自受、自與自受、使與使受。
Unfamiliar nuns giving or receiving directly, via messenger, both directly, both via messenger.

自與使受者，比丘尼自手與衣，比丘遣使受。
When personally given and received via messenger, the nun hands over the robe herself and the monk sends a messenger to receive it.

使與自受者，比丘尼遣使持衣與比丘，比丘自受。
When given via messenger and personally received, the nun sends a messenger with the robe to the monk, and the monk personally receives it.

自與自受者，比丘尼自與衣，比丘自受。
When both given and received personally, the nun hands the robe over herself and the monk personally receives it.

使與使受者，比丘尼遣使持衣與比丘，比丘遣使受。
When both given and received via messenger, the nun sends a messenger with the robe to the monk, and the monk sends a messenger to receive it.




若比丘從非親里比丘尼取衣，許貿易，不與、不教與、不自語、不教人語、還本衣、截本衣、減與、與異物、離見聞處、離界，是比丘得，波夜提罪。
If a monk receives a robe from a nun who is not a relative with the intent to trade, without giving, instructing to give, speaking himself, instructing others to speak, returning the original robe, cutting the original robe, giving less, giving other items, leaving the place, or crossing the boundary, he incurs a Pācittika offense.

不與者，自不與。
"Without giving" means not giving himself.

不教與者，不教他人與。
"Without instructing to give" means not instructing others to give.

不自語者，不自語比丘尼言：「後爾許時當與汝衣。」
"Without speaking himself" means not saying to the nun, "I will give you the robe after such a time."

不教語者，不使他人語比丘尼言：「後爾許時當與汝衣。」
"Without instructing others to speak" means not making others say to the nun, "He will give you the robe after such a time."

還本衣者，還比丘尼先衣，是不應與，應與餘衣。
"Returning the original robe" means returning the nun's original robe, which should not be given, and giving other robes instead.

截者，截本衣還彼，是不名貿。
"Cutting" means cutting the original robe to return to the nun, which is not considered trading.

減與者，得彼全衣已，與減小衣，是不名與，應與全足衣。
"Giving less" means receiving the entire robe and giving a smaller robe in return, which is not considered giving, and one should give a full robe.

與異物者，取彼衣已與鉢、若小鉢、若鍵鎡，若以飲食及餘物與，是不名貿，應與衣也。
"Giving other items" means receiving the robe and giving utensils, food, or other items in return, this is not considered trading; one should give a robe.

離見聞處者，若比丘取非親里比丘尼衣已，不與直、不教與、不自語、不教語、捨去、離見聞處，波夜提罪。
"Leaving the place" means if a monk receives a robe from a non-relative nun without direct giving, instruction to give, speaking himself, instructing others to speak, then leaves the place, he incurs a Pācittika offense.

離界者，若比丘取非親里比丘尼衣已，不與直、不自與、不教與、不自語、不教語、捨去、出界二十五肘，波夜提。
"Crossing the boundary" means if a monk receives a robe from a non-relative nun without direct giving, speaking himself, instructing to give, speaking himself, instructing others to speak, then leaves and crosses a boundary of twenty-five cubits, he incurs a Pācittika offense.

若比丘取非親里比丘尼衣已，不與直、不自與、不教與、不自語、不教語；若坐、若臥、若入定、皆得波夜提罪。
If a monk receives a robe from a non-relative nun without direct giving, speaking himself, instructing to give, speaking himself, instructing others to speak; whether sitting, lying, or entering meditation, he incurs a Pācittika offense.

若非親里比丘尼，與知識沙彌衣，作是言：「沙彌！我與汝是衣。汝持是衣，與某甲比丘，可得福德。」比丘取者，無罪。
If a non-relative nun gives a robe to a novice she knows, saying, "Novice! I give you this robe. Take this robe to such and such a monk for merit," and the monk receives it, there is no offense.

如是沙彌尼、式叉摩尼、優婆塞，乃至諸優婆夷言：「我與汝此衣。汝持此衣施與尊者某甲比丘，可得功德。」比丘取者，無罪。
Similarly, if a novice nun, probationer, male novice, or even layperson says, "I give you this robe. Take this robe and offer it to the Venerable such and such monk for merit," and the monk receives it, there is no offense.

若比丘尼語比丘言：「借尊者此衣，隨意著。」比丘得著，乃至破還，無罪。
If a nun says to a monk, "Borrow this robe from the Venerable and wear it as you wish," and the monk wears it until it is worn out and returns it, there is no offense.

若眾多比丘尼與一比丘衣，是一比丘應各各與眾多比丘尼貿衣，亦得以一衣與眾多比丘尼，語言：「姊妹！通貿衣。」
If many nuns give a robe to one monk, that monk should trade a robe with each nun individually, or he may give one robe to many nuns, saying, "Sisters! This robe is for mutual trade."

一比丘尼若別與眾多比丘衣，眾多比丘應各各別與一比丘尼貿易衣，亦得共與一衣，語言：「姊妹！此衣通貿衣。」
If one nun separately gives robes to many monks, those monks should trade robes separately with each nun, or they may collectively give one robe, saying, "Sisters! This robe is for mutual trade."

若眾多比丘尼與眾多比丘衣，眾多比丘應還與眾多比丘尼貿衣。
If many nuns give robes to many monks, those monks should return robes to those nuns for trade.

若一比丘尼與一比丘衣，一比丘應還與一比丘尼貿衣。
If one nun gives a robe to one monk, that monk should return a robe to that nun for trade.

若比丘尼與比丘，若鉢、若小鉢、若鍵鎡、若飲食，及餘小小物，盡得取，無罪。
If a nun gives to a monk utensils, small bowls, tools, food, or other small items, he may take them without offense.

是故說：「若比丘從非親里比丘尼取衣，除貿易，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Thus it is said: "If a monk receives a robe from a nun who is not a relative, except by trading, he incurs a Pācittika offense."




摩訶僧祇律卷第八
The Mahasanghika Vinaya, Scroll No. 8




