 please provide the lines you would like me to translate, and I'll be happy to help


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
[Scripture Information] Taisho New Edition of the Tripitaka Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




# 版本記錄

Release notes

發行日期：2024-08

Release date: 2024-08

最後更新：2024-07-12

Last updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

[Editing Instructions] This database was edited by the CBETA, the Buddhist Electronic Text Association, based on the "Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo".




蕭鎮國大德提供

Provided by Master Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Yayasan Gunung Gayaya

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain North American Master

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

New-style punctuation provided by Master Shi Ben Chan




【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Matters] This database can be freely distributed without charge; for detailed information, please refer to [The Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database].




inly, please provide the lines you'd like translated


摩訶僧祇律卷第三東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translation of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume Three by Buddha Bhadra and Faxian from the Eastern Jin period in ancient India




第四不與取戒

The Fourth Precept: Not Taking What is Not Given

 與話誰不與

With whom is it not given?

此事是何故

Why is this the case?

言以此受戒

Speaking thus one receives the precept.

若有求此戒

If one seeks this precept,

必當善思惟

One must contemplate it well.

知不與取者

Know that not taking what is not given,

乃是慈悲心

Is from a heart of compassion.




復次佛住王舍城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in Rajgir and expounded the teachings as mentioned above.

瓶沙王先祖時治罪人法，有作賊者，以手拍頭以為嚴教；賊大慚愧與死無異，後更不作。
During the reign of King Bimbisara's ancestors, the method of punishing criminals was to tap their heads with the hand as a stern lesson; the thief would feel deep shame, as if it were a death sentence, and would not commit the crime again.

至祖王時治罪人法，有作賊者，以灰圍之，須臾放去；賊大慚愧與死無異，後更不作。
By the time of the grandfather's rule, the method was to surround the thief with ashes and then release them shortly; the thief felt deep shame, as if it were a death sentence, and did not reoffend.

至父王時治罪人法，有作賊者，驅令出城；賊自慚愧與死無異，後更不作。
During the father king's time, the punishment was to drive the thief out of the city; the thief would feel self-reproach, as if it were a death sentence, and would not commit the crime again.

瓶沙王法，有作賊者，驅令出國，以是為教。
In King Bimbisara's rule, a thief would be expelled from the country as a form of punishment.

時有一賊七反驅出，猶故來還劫殺村城。
Once there was a thief who was expelled seven times but continued to return to plunder and murder in the villages and towns.

爾時有人捉得此賊縛送與王，白王言：「此賊七反驅出，猶故來還劫殺村城，願王苦治。」
Then someone caught the thief, bound him, and brought him to the king, saying, "This thief has been expelled seven times and still returns to plunder and murder. Please, king, punish him severely."

王告大臣：「將是賊去，以罪治之。」
The king told his ministers, "Take this thief and punish him according to his crime."

大臣白言：「止！止！大王，王自治罪莫付臣下。何有捨王，臣下專輒？大王教令時所尊重，正出於王，治法久存。」
The ministers replied, "Wait! Wait! Great king, it is just for the king himself to punish, not to entrust it to us. How can we overstep the bounds while you are the king? The esteemed rule of law comes directly from the king and has been established for long."

王言：「將去，截其小指。」
The king said, "Take him away and cut off his little finger."

爾時有司速將罪人急截其指，恐王有悔。
The officials quickly took the criminal and cut off his finger, fearing the king might change his mind.

時王即自試咬指看，痛殊難忍，即便遣信勅語大臣：「莫截彼指。」
The king then tried biting his own finger to feel the pain, finding it unbearably painful, he immediately sent a message to order his ministers: "Do not cut off his finger."

臣答王言：「已截其指。」
The ministers replied to the king, "His finger has already been cut off."

王甚愁悔即自念言：「我今便為法王之末，非法王始。夫為王者憂念民物，何有人王傷截人指？」
The king was deeply troubled and remorseful, thinking, "I am now the worst of kings, not among the best. As a king, we are to care for the people and all life; how could I have harmed someone by cutting off their finger?"

爾時瓶沙王疾勅嚴駕往詣世尊，頂禮佛足却坐一面，白佛言：「世尊！我曾祖先王治罪人法，唯以手拍頭。次第諸王及至我身，惡法日滋正化漸薄，謬得為王傷截人體，自惟無道愧懼實深。」
At that time, King Bimbisara hurriedly ordered his chariot to visit the World Honored One, respectfully bowed at the Buddha's feet, and sat to one side, saying, "World Honored One! The method of punishing criminals under my ancestors was simply to tap their heads with the hand. Successive kings, including myself, have seen our administration of justice degrade over time. I mistakenly caused harm by cutting off someone's finger. I deeply regret my lack of virtue and am sincerely ashamed."

佛告：「大王治國，盜齊幾錢罪應至死？盜齊幾錢應驅出國？盜齊幾錢應用刑罰？」
The Buddha said, "Great king, in governing the country, how much must a person steal to deserve a death penalty? How much should someone steal to be expelled? How much theft warrants punishment?"

爾時瓶沙王白佛言：「世尊！以十九錢為一罽利沙槃，分一罽利沙槃為四分，若盜一分、若一分直，罪應至死。」
At that time, King Bimbisara said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! Nineteen coins make one Krishasarpa, and if it is divided into four parts, stealing or equivalent to one part deserves death penalty."

爾時世尊為瓶沙王隨順說法示教利喜，示教利喜已，憂憒即除，禮佛而退。
The World Honored One then expounded the teachings to King Bimbisara in a way suitable to him, providing guidance and joy. After receiving the teachings and feeling relieved of his worries, the king paid respects to the Buddha and departed.



王去不久，爾時世尊往眾多比丘所，敷座而坐告諸比丘：

Not long after the king left, the World Honored One went to a large group of monks, prepared a seat and sat down, and said to them:

「向瓶沙王來至我所，為我作禮於一面坐，而白我言：

"The king came to me, paid homage, sat to one side, and said to me:

『世尊！我先曾祖治罪人法以手拍頭，正化相承乃至我身。』

'World Honored One, my ancestors ruled criminals by patting their heads, a tradition passed down to me.'

我即問言：『大王！盜至幾錢罪應至死，乃至應罰？』

I then asked, 'Great King, how many coins must be stolen to warrant a death sentence, or alternatively, a punishment?'

王言：『十九錢為一罽利沙槃，分一罽利沙槃以為四分，若盜一分、若一分直，罪應至死。』

The king said, 'Nineteen coins make one Kila-shapan; dividing one Kila-shapan into four parts, if someone steals a part or its value, the punishment should be death.'

我為瓶沙王隨順說法，歡喜而去。」

I explained the teachings according to the king's wishes, and he left joyfully."

佛告諸比丘：

The Buddha told the monks:

「從今當知十九故錢名一罽利沙槃，分一罽利沙槃為四分，若盜一分、若一分直，犯波羅夷。」

"From now on, know that nineteen old coins are called one Kila-shapan. Divide one Kila-shapan into four parts; if someone steals a part or its value, they commit a major offense."



時諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是瓶沙王畏罪乃爾？」  
At that time, the monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Why is King Bimbisara so afraid of sin?"

佛告諸比丘：「是瓶沙王，不但今世如是畏罪，過去世時亦曾畏罪。」  
The Buddha said to the monks, "King Bimbisara, not only in this life is he afraid of sin, but he was also afraid of sin in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！已曾爾耶？」  
The monks said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! Was this ever the case?"

佛言：「如是！過去世時，有城名波羅奈，國名迦尸。爾時有王，號曰名稱。  
The Buddha said, "Indeed! In past lives, there was a city called Varanasi in a country named Kashi. At that time, there was a king named Namasutra."

時國人民皆工巧技術以自生活，所謂伎樂歌頌，或作金銀寶器、花鬘瓔珞嚴飾之具，或調象馬及諸道術，種種工巧無不備悉，以是生活。  
The people of the country lived by skilled crafts, such as music and singing, making gold and silver vessels, flower garlands and ornaments, training elephants and horses, and various kinds of crafts were all comprehensive, so they lived.

若無工巧技術者，謂之愚癡。若有作賊者，亦名愚癡。  
Those without skills or techniques were called fools. Those who engaged in theft were also called fools.

時有一人作賊，國人縛送與王，白言：『大王！此人作愚癡事，願王治之。』  
At that time, a man committed theft and the people of the country tied him up and delivered him to the king, saying, 'Great King! This man has committed a foolish act, we wish the king to deal with him.'

王言：『止！止！世人失財世人作賊，我復何用共作惡為？』  
The king said, 'Stop! Stop! When people lose their wealth, people become thieves. Why should I join them in doing evil?'

王便思惟：『當作何方便我治王事，令群臣不知、惡法不起？』  
The king then considered, 'What method should I use to handle kingly affairs, so that the ministers do not know, and evil laws do not arise?'

復更思惟：『自昔以來始有一愚癡人，是愚癡人不能滿千我便命終。』  
He further thought, 'Since ancient times there has only been one foolish person. If the foolish people cannot reach a thousand, I will be finished.'

即將愚人付一大臣：『我須千愚癡人用作大會，若當數滿白我令知。』  
So he handed the fool over to a minister: 'I need a thousand foolish people for a great assembly. If the number is full, inform me.'

臣即執持愚人繫在一處。  
The minister took charge of the fool and detained him in one place.

王尋念言：『是愚癡者，將無飢死。』  
The king thought, 'This fool might die of hunger.'

便告大臣：『將愚人來。』重告臣曰：『好看此人莫令羸瘦，著我無憂園中，五欲娛樂伎樂供給。』  
He then told the minister, 'Bring the fool here.' Again he told the minister, 'Take good care of this person, do not let him become thin, place him in my Garden of Serenity, and provide him with sensual delights and entertainment.'

大臣受教，即將愚人如王所勅。  
The minister obeyed the instructions and took the fool as the king ordered.

爾時復有愚人，聞王捕得愚人，乃至安置無憂園中伎樂供給，便自送身詣大臣所。  
At that time, another fool heard that the king had captured the fool and arranged for him to be placed in the Garden of Serenity with entertainment, so he went to the minister himself.

白言：『我是愚癡人！』  
He said, 'I am a foolish person!'

大臣欲取王意，來便送著無憂園中，如是不久其數滿千。  
The minister, intending to please the king, sent him to the Garden of Serenity, and soon the number reached a thousand.

臣白王言：『愚人者數已滿千，更須何等？當速辦之。』  
The minister reported to the king, 'The number of fools has reached a thousand. What is further needed? Please arrange it quickly.'

王聞此言甚大愁憂：『昔來久遠始有一愚癡人，如何今者未經幾時已有千數？將是末世惡法增長？』  
The king heard this and became very worried: 'Since ancient times, there has only been one foolish person. How is it that now so soon there are a thousand? Is this the result of the end-time evil laws increasing?'

王勅群臣於無憂園中，灑掃燒香懸繒幡蓋，備辦種種餚饍飲食。  
The king ordered the ministers to sprinkle and clean, burn incense, and hang banners in the Garden of Serenity, and prepare all kinds of dishes and food.

臣即如教備王所勅。  
The ministers followed the orders and prepared as instructed by the king.

時王出遊，與諸群臣十八部眾詣無憂園中，王既坐已問諸群臣：『愚人今在何處？可喚將來。』  
The king went out for a trip, with all the ministers and eighteen groups of people to the Garden of Serenity. After sitting, the king asked the ministers, 'Where are the fools now? Have them called here.'

愚人盡至，王見愚人久在園中，衣被垢膩爪長髮亂，即勅群臣：『將愚人去，沐浴新衣剪髮截甲，然後將來。來已與種種飲食，賜以財寶恣其所須。』  
All the fools came, and the king saw that they had been in the garden for a long time, their clothes dirty, nails long, and hair disheveled, so he instructed the ministers, 'Take the fools away, bathe them, give them new clothes, cut their hair and nails, then bring them back. Provide them with various foods and give them wealth as they need.'

即勅愚人：『汝等還家供養父母，勤修家業莫復作賊。』  
He then instructed the fools, 'Go home and support your parents, work diligently on your family business, and do not steal again.'

爾時愚人聞王告勅，歡喜奉行。  
At that time, the fools heard the king's orders, and they happily complied.

時彼國王即以王位授與太子，出家入山學仙人法，是時國王而說偈言：  
Then, that country's king passed the throne to the crown prince and renounced the world to enter the mountains to learn the ways of sages. At that time, the king recited a verse:



“寻找千个愚人，      

To gather them seems difficult;




如何未幾時，

How could it be so soon,

千數忽已滿？

That the thousands suddenly are filled?




惡法日夜增，
Evil laws increase day and night,

大會於是止；
Thus the great assembly ceases;




欲離世惡人，  
If you wish to avoid the wicked people of the world,

宜時當出家。  
it is advisable to leave home at the right time.




佛告諸比丘：「爾時國王名稱者，豈異人乎？即瓶沙王是。
The Buddha told the monks, "The king of that time, who is named, was not a different person but King Bimbisara.

瓶沙王先世以來常畏罪報，今既為王續亦畏罪。」
King Bimbisara, from past generations, was always afraid of the consequences of sin, and now, even as king, he continues to fear sin."

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！云何是瓶沙王教令行已尋復還悔？」
The monks said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! Why does King Bimbisara, after giving orders, quickly regret them?"

佛告諸比丘：「是瓶沙王，不但今日教令行已尋復還悔，過去世時亦曾還悔。」
The Buddha told the monks, "It is not only today that King Bimbisara regrets after giving orders; he also regretted it in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「已曾爾耶？」
The monks said to the Buddha, "Did this really happen?"

佛言：「如是！」
The Buddha said, "Yes!"

佛告諸比丘：「過去世時有婆羅門，無有錢財以乞自活，是婆羅門有婦不生兒子，家有那俱羅虫便生一子。
The Buddha told the monks, "In a past life, there was a Brahmin who had no money and begged to survive. This Brahmin had a wife who couldn't bear children, and in his home, a Nakula insect gave birth to a child.

時婆羅門以無子故，念彼那俱羅子如其兒想，那俱羅子於婆羅門亦如父想。
At that time, the Brahmin, because he had no children, regarded the Nakula insect's child as his own son, and the Nakula child also regarded the Brahmin as his father.

時婆羅門於他舍會，或得乳酪及得餅肉，持還歸家與那俱羅。
The Brahmin, in gatherings at other people's houses, sometimes got milk, curds, and meat, which he brought back home and gave to the Nakula.

又於後時婆羅門婦忽便有娠，月滿生子便作是念：『是那俱羅生吉祥子，能使我有兒。』
Later, the Brahmin's wife unexpectedly became pregnant and gave birth to a son. She thought, 'This Nakula insect has brought me good fortune, allowing me to have a child.'

時婆羅門欲出行乞食，時便勅婦言：『汝若出行，當將兒去，慎莫留後。』
When the Brahmin wanted to go out and beg for food, he instructed his wife, 'If you go out, you must take the child with you, and do not leave him behind.'

婆羅門婦與兒食已，便至比舍借碓舂穀。
The Brahmin's wife, having fed the child, went to a neighbor's house to borrow a mortar and pestle to grind grain.

是時小兒有酥酪香，時有毒蛇乘香來至，張口吐毒欲殺小兒。
At that time, the little boy had a smell of butter and curds, and a venomous snake, attracted by the scent, came, opened its mouth, and wanted to kill the child.

那俱羅虫便作是念：『我父出行，母亦不在，云何毒蛇欲殺我弟？』
The Nakula insect then thought, 'My father is out, and my mother is not here; how can this poisonous snake want to kill my younger brother?'



毒蛇那俱羅，

The venomous snakes that gather together,

飛烏及兔梟；

The flying birds, and the rabbit owls;




沙门婆罗门，  
Monks and Brahmins,

系母及前子，  
Tying up the mother and the previous child,




常共相憎嫉，  
Often harboring mutual envy,

懷毒欲相害。  
Harboring poison, wishing to harm each other.




時那俱羅便殺毒蛇，段為七分，復作是念：

At that time, Nākula killed the poisonous snake, cutting it into seven pieces, and then thought:

『我今殺蛇令弟得活，父母知者必當賞我。』

"I have killed the snake to save my brother, if my parents know this, they will surely reward me."

以血塗口當門而住，欲令父母見之歡喜。

He smeared his mouth with blood, stood at the door, hoping to make his parents happy when they saw it.

時婆羅門始從外來，遙見其婦在於舍外，便瞋恚言：

At that time, the Brahman came from outside, saw his wife standing outside the house, and angrily said:

『我教行時當將兒去，何以獨行？』

"When I went to teach, I told you to take the child with you, why are you here alone?"

父欲入門，見那俱羅口中有血，便作是念：

The father wanted to enter the house, saw Nākula with blood in his mouth, and thought:

『我夫婦不在，是那俱羅於後將無殺食我兒？』

"When my wife and I were not here, did Nākula kill and eat my child?"

瞋恚而言：『徒養此虫為其所害。』

He angrily said, "I raised this creature only to be harmed by it."

即前以杖打殺那俱羅。

He then went forward and beat Nākula with a stick, killing him.

既入門內，自見其兒坐於庭中𠲿指而戲，又見毒蛇七分在地，

Upon entering the house, he saw his child sitting in the courtyard playing with his fingers, and also saw the snake cut into seven pieces on the ground,

見是事已即大憂悔。

Seeing this, he was filled with great sorrow and regret.

時婆羅門深自苦責：

At that time, the Brahman reproached himself deeply:

『是那俱羅善有人情救我子命，我不善觀察卒便殺之。可痛！可憐！』

"Nākula, so compassionate and humane, saved my child's life, and I, without observing carefully, killed him. How painful! How pitiful!"

即便迷悶躄地。

He then fainted and fell to the ground in despair.

時空中有天，即說偈言：

At that moment, a deity in the sky spoke a verse:




宜審諦觀察，
One should carefully observe with attention,

勿行卒威怒；
Do not act with sudden might or anger;




善友恩愛離，
The departure of kind and loving friends,

枉害傷良善；
Unjustly harms the good and virtuous.




喻如婆羅門，　　
It's like a Brahmin,

殺彼那俱羅。
killing Nakula.




佛告諸比丘：「爾時婆羅門者豈異人乎？即瓶沙王是。

The Buddha told the monks: "Wasn't the Brahmin at that time someone special? It was King Bimbisara.

彼於昔時，以曾輕躁作事尋悔，今復如是。」

He used to act recklessly and then regretted it, and now it is again like this."

佛告諸比丘：「依止王舍城比丘皆悉令集，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "All the monks residing in Rajagriha should be gathered, even those who have already heard should hear again.

若比丘於聚落、空地，不與取。

If a monk in a village or open field takes something not given,

隨盜物，王或捉、或殺、或縛、或擯出言：

and is caught stealing, the king might arrest, kill, bind, or banish him, saying:

『咄！男子！汝賊耶？汝癡耶？』

'Hey! Are you a thief? Are you foolish?'

比丘如是不與取者，波羅夷，不應共住。」

A monk who takes what is not given in this way is guilty of Parajika and should not live together."

(第二戒緣竟)

(The reason for the second rule ends here.)




比丘者，比丘名受具足、善受具足，
A bhikkhu is someone who has received full ordination, who has well-received full ordination,

一白三羯磨，無遮法和合十眾、十眾已上，
through the procedure of 'one proposition and three proclamations', with a gathering of ten or more, unobstructed in any formal act,

年滿二十，此名比丘。
and is over the age of twenty; such is called a bhikkhu.




聚落者，聚落名若都牆圍遶、若水渠溝塹籬柵圍遶。
Settlement refers to those encircled by walls or surrounded by ditches, canals, or fences.

又復聚落者，放牧聚落、伎兒聚落、營車聚落、牛眠聚落、四家及一積薪亦名聚落。
Furthermore, there are pastoral settlements, performer settlements, caravan settlements, cattle sleep settlements, four households and one pile of firewood, all also called settlements.




空地者，空地名垣牆院外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
Vacant land refers to the area outside walls and yards, excluding the boundaries of settlements.

聚落界者，去籬不遠，多人所行蹤跡到處，是名聚落界。  
The boundary of a settlement is not far from the fence, where many people frequent, known as the settlement boundary.

如是水渠溝塹籬柵外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
Similarly, outside ditches, trenches, and fences, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.

放牧聚落者，最邊巷舍外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
In grazing settlements, outside the outermost alleys and houses, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.

伎兒聚落者，最邊車外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
In performer settlements, outside the outermost carriages, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.

營車聚落者，最邊車外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
In camp settlements, outside the outermost carriages, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.

牛眠聚落者，最邊家外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
In cattle resting settlements, outside the outermost houses, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.

四家及一積薪聚落者，最邊家外，除聚落界餘者盡名空地。  
In settlements with four houses and a woodpile, outside the outermost houses, excluding settlement boundaries, is all called vacant land.




不與者，若男、若女、若黃門、二形、在家、出家，無有與者，盜心取。
If not given, whether male, female, eunuch, hermaphrodite, householder, or one gone forth, if there is no giver, one takes with a mind of theft.

隨盜物者，物有八種：
As for the stolen items, there are eight types:

一者時藥；
1. Timely medicine;

二者夜分藥；
2. Nightly medicine;

三者七日藥；
3. Seven-day medicine;

四者盡壽藥；
4. Lifelong medicine;

五者隨物；
5. Material;

六者重物；
6. Heavy item;

七者不淨物；
7. Impure item;

八者淨不淨物，是名為八。
8. Pure or impure item, these are named as the eight.



取者，取名捉物移離本處，是名為取。
To take is to grasp an object and move it away from its original place, that is called taking.




隨其所盜者，不如十六督監，盜取王家一枚小錢，買瓜食之為王所殺。
One who steals should not be governed by sixteen overseers, as stealing a small coin from the king's treasury to buy a melon led to being killed by the king.

王無定法自隨其意，或小盜便殺、或盜多不死。
The king, without fixed laws, followed his own will, sometimes killing for small thefts and at other times not for large ones.

當如世尊問瓶沙王法：「大王治國，盜齊幾錢至死？幾錢驅出？幾錢刑罰？」
This should be like the Buddha asked King Bimbisara: "Great King, in ruling a country, at what amount should theft lead to death? At what amount should it lead to exile? At what amount should it lead to punishment?"

瓶沙王答佛：「十九錢為一罽利沙槃，一罽利沙槃分為四分，若取一分、若取一分直，罪應至死。」
King Bimbisara answered the Buddha: "Nineteen coins make one Karshapanas, and one Karshapanas is divided into four parts. If one takes one part or its equivalent, the punishment should be death."

今隨所盜義以此為准。
Now, the meaning of theft should be based on this standard.



王者，王名剎利、婆羅門、長者、居士，受職為王。
The king, bearing titles of Kshatriya, Brahmin, Elder, and Householder, is appointed as king.




王捉者，王使人執，或捉其手及餘身分，是名捉。
The one who captures the king is ordered by the king, or seizes his hand and other parts of the body; this is called capturing.




殺者，奪其命是名為殺。
To kill is to take life, this is called killing.




縛者，或以屋縛、或以城縛、或以材縛、或著鎖絆、或著杻械，是名為縛。
A binding, whether by a house, or by a city, or by materials, or by chains and shackles, or by manacles, is called a binding.




擯出者，驅出聚落、驅出城、驅出國，是名擯出。
Those who are expelled are driven out of the settlement, out of the city, out of the country, and this is called expulsion.




咄！男子！
Hey! Man!

汝賊！
You thief!

汝癡！
You fool!

汝愚癡者，呵責之辭。
You, a foolish person, this is a reproach.



比丘如是者，犯波羅夷，不應共住。
If a monk commits a grave offense, they should not live together.

波羅夷者，謂於法智退沒墮落，無道果分，是名波羅夷。
A grave offense means falling away from the wisdom of the teachings, without attainment of the path; this is called a grave offense.

如是乃至盡智、無生智，於彼諸智退沒墮落，無道果分，是名波羅夷。
Similarly, if one falls away from perfect wisdom or the wisdom of non-arising, without attainment of the path, it is called a grave offense.

又復波羅夷者，於涅槃退沒墮落，無證果分，是名波羅夷。
Furthermore, if one falls away from Nirvana and lacks any attainment of fruition, it is called a grave offense.

又復波羅夷者，離於不盜法退沒墮落，是名波羅夷。
Moreover, if one falls away from the morality of not stealing, it is called a grave offense.

又復波羅夷者，所可犯罪不可發露悔過故，名波羅夷。
Additionally, if one commits an offense that cannot be confessed or repented, it is called a grave offense.



時藥者，一切根、一切穀、一切肉。

Seasonal medicines include all roots, all grains, and all meats.

根者。治毒草根、藕根、𮅙樓根、芋根、蘿蔔根、葱根，是名根。

Roots include poisonous grass roots, lotus roots, water chestnut roots, taro roots, radish roots, and onion roots; these are called roots.

穀者，有十七種：一稻、二赤稻、三小麥、四𪍿麥、五小豆、六胡豆、七大豆、八豌豆、九粟、十黍。

There are seventeen types of grains: 1. Rice, 2. Red rice, 3. Wheat, 4. Barley, 5. Black beans, 6. Chickpeas, 7. Soybeans, 8. Peas, 9. Millet, 10. Glutinous millet.

十一麻子、十二薑句、十三闍致、十四波薩陀、十五莠子、十六脂那句、十七俱陀婆，是名十七種穀。

11. Hemp seeds, 12. Ginger kernels, 13. Barley, 14. Pasatta, 15. Wild rice, 16. Fat grains, 17. Kudava; these are called the seventeen types of grains.

肉者，水陸虫肉。

Meats include aquatic and terrestrial insect meats.

云何水虫？水虫者，魚、龜、提彌祇羅、修羅、修修羅、修修磨羅，如是等水中諸虫可食者，是名水虫。

What are aquatic insects? Aquatic insects include fish, turtles, frogs, devas, enlightened beings, and spirits; these edible water creatures are called aquatic insects.

云何陸虫？陸虫者，兩足、四足、無足、多足，如是等名陸虫。

What are terrestrial insects? Terrestrial insects include those with two legs, four legs, no legs, and many legs; these are called terrestrial insects.

如是根食、穀食、肉食，皆名時食。

Thus, root foods, grain foods, and meat foods are all called seasonal foods.

何以故？時得食，非時不得食，是名時食。

Why is this so? Because they can be consumed in season and not out of season, they are called seasonal foods.

若比丘盜心，觸時藥，犯越比尼罪；動彼物，得偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，波羅夷。

If a monk harbors a thieving mind and touches seasonal medicines, he commits an offense of serious transgression; if he moves those items, he commits the offense of theft; if he leaves the original place filled, he commits a grave offense.



分藥者，十四種漿：
The medicine of the night is of fourteen types of juice:

一菴羅漿、
1. Mango juice,

二拘梨漿、
2. Banana juice,

三安石榴漿、
3. Pomegranate juice,

四巔哆梨漿、
4. Piyal juice,

五蒲桃漿、
5. Grape juice,

六波樓沙漿、
6. Mango-like fruit juice,

七揵揵漿、
7. Thick juice,

八芭蕉漿、
8. Plantain juice,

九罽伽提漿、
9. Rumex juice,

十劫頗羅漿、
10. Jujube juice,

十一婆籠渠漿、
11. Large-seeded chikoo juice,

十二甘蔗漿、
12. Sugarcane juice,

十三呵梨陀漿、
13. Fig juice,

十四呿波梨漿。
14. Water lily juice.

此諸漿，初夜受初夜飲，
These various juices, received in the early night, are drunk in the early night,

中夜受中夜飲，
Received at midnight, are drunk at midnight,

後夜受後夜飲，
Received in the later night, are drunk in the later night,

食前受至初夜飲，
Received before eating, are drunk until the early night,

是故名夜分藥。
Thus they are called the medicine of the night.

若比丘盜心，
If a monk with a thieving mind,

觸夜分藥，犯越比尼罪；
Touches the medicine of the night, he commits a pacittiya offense;

動彼物，偷蘭遮罪；
Moves those items, he commits a Sanghadisesa offense;

離本處滿者，波羅夷。
Taking them away from their original place to completion, he commits a parajika offense.



酥、油、蜜、石蜜、脂、生酥。

The seven-day medicines are ghee, oil, honey, sugar, fat, and fresh ghee.

酥者，牛、水牛酥，羖羊、羺羊酥，駱駝酥。

Ghee refers to cow ghee, buffalo ghee, ram ghee, goat ghee, and camel ghee.

油者，胡麻油、蕪菁油、黃藍油、阿陀斯油、蓖麻油、比樓油、比周縵陀油、迦蘭遮油、差羅油、阿提目多油、縵頭油、大麻油，及餘種種油，是名為油。

Oil refers to sesame oil, turnip oil, rapeseed oil, mustard oil, castor oil, bilona oil, biduja-manda oil, kalanza oil, sal oil, artemisia oil, benzoin oil, hemp oil, and various other oils; these are called oil.

蜜者，軍荼蜜、布底蜜、黃蜂蜜、黑蜂蜜，是名為蜜。

Honey refers to wild honey, comb honey, yellow bee honey, and black bee honey; these are called honey.

石蜜者，槃施蜜、那羅蜜、縵闍蜜、摩訶毘梨蜜，是名石蜜。

Sugar refers to sugar candy, nalara sugar, manjuga sugar, and great veruli sugar; these are called sugar.

脂者，魚脂、熊脂、羆脂、修修羅脂、猪脂，此諸脂無骨、無肉、無血、無臭香、無食氣，頓受聽七日病比丘食，是名脂。

Fat refers to fish fat, bear fat, fat from the Asiatic black bear, asura fat, and pig fat; these fats have no bone, no meat, no blood, no odor, and no food smell, they can be consumed immediately by a sick monk for seven days; these are called fat.

生酥者，牛羊等諸生酥，淨漉洗無食氣，頓受聽七日病比丘食。

Fresh ghee refers to fresh ghee from cows and sheep, which is purified and has no food smell, can be consumed immediately by a sick monk for seven days.

此諸藥清淨無食氣，一時頓受得七日服，故名七日藥。

These medicines are pure and have no food smell, they can be consumed immediately for seven days, hence they are called seven-day medicines.

若比丘盜心，觸七日藥，越比尼罪；動彼物，偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，波羅夷。

If a monk, with a mind of theft, touches the seven-day medicines, he commits a pārājika offense; if he moves those items, it is a saṅghādisesa offense; if he takes them away from their location, it is a pārājika offense.



盡壽藥者，呵梨、勒毘醯勒、阿摩勒、蓽茇、胡椒、薑、長壽果、仙人果、乳果、豆色果、波羅悉多果、槃那果、小五根、大五根、一切鹽，除八種灰餘一切灰，除石蜜滓地餘一切地。

The medicine for longevity includes hari, haritaki, amalaki, pippali, pepper, ginger, long-life fruit, celestial fruit, milk fruit, bean fruit, pomegranate, panana fruit, small five roots, large five roots, all types of salt, all ash except for eight types, and all earth except for stone honey sediment earth.

此諸藥無食氣，頓受病比丘終身服，是名終身藥。

These medicines are tasteless and are to be used lifelong by sick monks; they are called lifelong medicines.

若比丘盜心，觸終身藥，越比尼罪；

If a monk with a thieving mind touches the lifelong medicine, he commits a pācittiya offense.

動彼物，偷蘭罪；

If he moves it, he commits a theft offense.

離本處滿者，波羅夷。

If he removes it from its original place, he commits a pārājika offense.




隨物者，三衣、尼師檀、覆瘡衣、雨浴衣、鉢、大揵鎡、小揵鎡、鉢囊、絡囊、漉水囊、二種腰帶、刀子、銅匙、鉢支、鍼筒、軍持澡罐、盛油皮瓶、錫杖、革屣、繖蓋、扇，及餘種種所應畜物，是名隨物。
The things one possesses are the three robes, nun's robe, covering robe, rain bathing robe, bowl, large needle, small needle, bowl bag, net bag, water filter bag, two kinds of belts, knife, copper spoon, bowl stand, needle case, water jug, oil container, staff, leather shoes, umbrella cover, fan, and other various items that should be kept, these are called possessions.

復有俗人隨物、軍器、刀杖、衣服，及餘種種白衣所畜眾物，亦名隨物。
There are also worldly people's possessions, weapons, swords and staffs, clothes, and other various items kept by laypeople, which are also called possessions.

若比丘盜心，觸隨物，得越比尼罪；動彼物，偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with a mind to steal, touches possessions, he incurs a transgression; if he moves them, he incurs a minor theft offense; if he completely separates them from their original place, it is a grave offense.



重物者，床、臥具及餘重物。
Heavy items include beds, bedding, and other heavy objects.

床臥具者，臥床、坐床、小褥、大褥、拘㲲枕，
Bedding includes beds, sitting beds, small mattresses, large mattresses, hard pillows,

及餘重物者，一切銅器、一切木器、竹器、一切瓦器。
and other heavy objects like all bronze vessels, all wooden vessels, bamboo vessels, and all pottery.

銅器名者，銅瓶、銅釜、銅鑊、銅杓，及餘種種銅器，是名銅器。
Bronze vessels include bronze bottles, bronze pots, bronze cauldrons, bronze ladles, and various other bronze items.

木器竹器者，木臼、木瓶、木瓫、木椀、木杓，
Wooden and bamboo vessels include wooden mortars, wooden bottles, wooden bowls, wooden vessels, wooden ladles,

竹筐、竹席乃至竹筥，及餘種種一切木器竹器，是名竹器木器。
bamboo baskets, bamboo mats, and even bamboo hampers, and all other wooden and bamboo vessels.

瓦器者，從大甕乃至燈盞，是名瓦器。
Pottery includes anything from large jars to lamp stands.

床臥具及種種餘物，是名重物。
Bedding and various other items are called heavy objects.

若比丘盜心，觸此重物等，得越比尼罪；
If a monk, with a theft-mind, touches these heavy objects, he commits a transgression of wrongdoing.

動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves them, a thullaccaya offense.

離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he takes them away from their original place, it is a parajika offense.



不淨物者，錢金銀，比丘不得觸故名不淨物。
Impure things, such as money of gold or silver, are named impure things because monks must not touch them.

若比丘盜心，觸不淨物，得越比尼罪；
If a monk touches impure things with the mind to steal, he incurs a wrong-doing offense.

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves that thing, he incurs a stealing offense.

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If it is fully removed from its original place, he incurs a defeat offense.



淨不淨物者，真珠、琉璃、珂貝、珊瑚、頗梨、車𤦲、馬瑙、璧玉，是諸寶物得觸不得著故，名淨不淨物。
The clean or not clean objects are pearls, glass, shell ornaments, coral, beryl, agate, onyx, chalcedony, and jade; these treasures can be touched but not possessed, thus called clean or not clean objects.

若比丘盜心，觸此淨不淨物，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk with a mind to steal touches these clean or not clean objects, he incurs a lesser offense; if he moves them, it's a stealing offense; if he takes them completely from their place, it's a major offense.




復有十六種物：地、地中物，

There are also sixteen kinds of things: earth and things on the earth,

水、水中物，

water and things in the water,

船、船中物，

boats and things in the boats,

乘、乘中物，

vehicles and things in the vehicles,

四足、四足上物，

four-legged creatures and things on the four-legged creatures,

兩足、兩足上物，

two-legged creatures and things on the two-legged creatures,

無足、無足上物，

no-legged creatures and things on the no-legged creatures,

虛空、虛空中物。

space and things in the space.




云何地？
What is the earth?

金鑛、銀鑛、赤銅鑛、鉛錫鑛、白鑞鑛、空青、雌黃石、膽鹽石、灰赤土、白墡，乃至瓦師取土地，是名地。
Gold ore, silver ore, copper ore, lead-tin ore, white tin ore, lapis lazuli, orpiment, gypsum stone, red clay, white sand, and even clay for pottery are called earth.

若比丘盜心，觸此諸地者，得越比尼罪；
If a monk with a mind to steal touches any of these types of earth, he commits an offense of wrong-doing;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
if he moves it, it is a theft offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
if it is removed completely from its original place, it is a grave offense.



地中物者，若人藏物著地中，所謂錢、金銀、頗梨、珂貝、真珠、車𤦲、馬瑙；
The objects in the ground are those buried by people, such as money, gold and silver, beryl, conches, pearls, chariots, and agates;

酥瓶、油瓶、石蜜瓶；
Butter jars, oil jars, crystallized honey jars;

根、莖、枝、葉、果等諸藥，
Various medicines such as roots, stems, branches, leaves, and fruits,

乃至八種物藏著地中，是名地中物。
Up to eight kinds of items buried in the ground, are called objects in the ground.

若比丘盜心，觸此地中物者，得越比尼罪；
If a monk with an intention to steal touches these objects in the ground, he gets a transgression of the lesser offense;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves them, it's a grave transgression;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he removes them completely from their original place, it's a serious offense of expulsion.



水者，水有十種：河水、池水、井水、龍淵水、清水、溫泉水、不病水、雨澇水、空中水、長流水，

Water, there are ten kinds of water: river water, pond water, well water, dragon abyss water, clear water, hot spring water, disease-free water, flood water, aerial water, and flowing water.

有處水貴、有處水賤，或一錢得四五瓶，或一切所有物得一瓶；

Some places have expensive water, some have cheap water, you might get four or five bottles for one coin, or need all your possessions for one bottle;

如近村城邑而有好水，一錢得五六瓶；

If there's good water near a village or town, you might get five or six bottles for one coin;

有估客遠行路由曠遠，或五由旬、或十乃至五百由旬，道路無水，彼諸估客皆各負水去，

If traders travel long distances, about five yojanas, or ten, up to five hundred yojanas, where there is no water on the road, they each carry water with them,

或有自供或有賣者。

some for personal use and some for selling.

時有一估客水少不足，為熱渴所逼，便作是念：「若我存者自能得錢，若我渴死錢復何用？」盡以錢物買一瓶水。

Once a trader had insufficient water, exhausted by heat and thirst, he thought, "If I live, I can make money; if I die of thirst, what use is money?" and spent all his wealth for one bottle of water.

時有比丘隨估客行，估客常供給比丘水，未至所在水便欲盡。

At that time, there was a monk traveling with the traders, and they would often supply him with water, but before reaching their destination, the water ran out.

時估客語比丘言：「道路猶遠，水復欲盡，爾許水以供尊者，爾許水我自當飲。」

The trader told the monk, "The road is still long, and the water is running out. This amount is to serve you, this amount I shall drink myself."

如估客所施，比丘應當如其量飲，若盜心多飲，滿者，波羅夷；

As given by the trader, the monk should drink according to the measure; if he drinks with a thieving mind until it's full, it's a grave offense;

不滿者，偷蘭罪。

If not full, it's a lesser offense.

估客復言：「今供給尊者水飲，願莫與他。」

The trader again said, "This water is for the Venerable One; please do not share it with others."

時有老病人，為熱渴所逼，來從比丘乞水飲。

An old sick person, oppressed by heat and thirst, came to ask the monk for water to drink.

比丘慈心給彼病者，作是思惟：「主人雖作是言，彼病可愍，我今以水施之，主人故當不見怪責。」

The monk, with compassion, thought, "Although the owner said this, the sick person is pitiable. I will give them water, and the owner should not blame me."

以同意故不犯。

With the same intention, there's no offense.

有人乘船載水，比丘為渴所逼，盜心，觸彼船上水者，得越比尼罪；

Someone loaded water onto a boat, and the monk, pressed by thirst, with a thieving mind, touching the water on the boat, incurs a minor offense;

若以鉢、若揵鎡盛彼水，未離船者，偷蘭罪；

If using a bowl or measuring cup to hold the water, not leaving the boat, it's a lesser offense;

若持水去，身衣盡離船，滿者，波羅夷。

If carrying the water away, with body and clothes fully leaving the boat, it's a grave offense.

穿彼水器，得越比尼罪；

If piercing the water container, it's a minor offense;

若以筒就穿孔飲水，滿者，波羅夷。

If using a straw to drink through a hole, it's a grave offense.

若稍稍飲、數數止者，口口偷蘭罪。

If sipping slowly and stopping repeatedly, it's a lesser offense for each sip.

若水器先有塞孔，以盜心拔塞，得越比尼罪。

If the container initially has a block in the hole, removing it with a thieving mind incurs a minor offense.

水注器中，得偷蘭罪。

Pouring the water into the container incurs a lesser offense.

若水注斷，滿者，波羅夷。

If the water stream breaks fully, it's a grave offense.

若水連注未斷，即起悔心畏犯重罪，還以水倒本器中者，偷蘭罪。

If the water stream is continuous and, with regret and fear of committing a severe offense, one returns the water to its original container, it's a lesser offense.

若欲合船盜者，順牽船尾過船頭處，波羅夷。

If intending to steal a boat and dragging it so the tail passes the head, it's a grave offense.

若倒牽船者，船頭過船尾處、若右邊傍牽左過右者，波羅夷。

If pulling a submerged boat, the bow over the stern, or dragging from the right side over the left, it's a grave offense.

若左邊傍牽亦如是。

It’s the same if dragged from the left side.

若小船易動，比丘盜心，觸者，得越比尼罪；

For a small easily-moving boat, if a monk touches it with a thieving mind, it's a minor offense;

若動彼小船，偷蘭罪；

If moving the small boat, it's a lesser offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。

If it's completely moved from its original place, it's a grave offense.

若人有溉灌渠流水，或一宿直一錢，乃至二、三、四、五錢，

If someone has irrigation ditch flow and pays one coin per night, up to two, three, four, or five coins,

若比丘若為佛法僧自為有盜心壞彼渠者，得越比尼罪；

If a monk with a thieving mind, for the sake of the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha, breaks the channel, it's a minor offense;

水流入田，偷蘭罪；

If water flows into a field, it's a lesser offense;

滿者，波羅夷。

If full, it's a grave offense.

若比丘不欲直壞渠，方便假牽塼木令水決出，牽時得越比尼罪；

If a monk doesn’t want to directly break the channel, but indirectly pulls bricks or wood causing a water breach, during this dragging, it's a minor offense;

水流入田，偷蘭罪；

If water flows into a field, it's a lesser offense;

滿者，波羅夷。

If full, it's a grave offense.

若作方便驅牛羊駱駝壞渠者亦如是。

If using cattle, sheep, or camels to damage the channel by indirect means, it's the same.

若比丘嫉妬心壞渠棄水者，得越比尼罪。

If a monk, with a jealous heart, destroys a channel to waste water, it's a minor offense.

若比丘共估客行曠野中，有人言：「明後日當至水。」

If a monk travels with traders in the wilderness, someone says, "In two days, we shall reach water."

時有估客大擔水行，比丘甚渴乞水不得，

A trader carries a large load of water, and the monk, very thirsty, cannot get water,

便瞋恚言：「弊惡人汝何乃慳貪？

and angrily says, "Miserable person, why so stingy?

多持水行亦不能自飲，亦不與畜生，亦不與沙門婆羅門。

Carrying so much water, you neither drink it yourself nor give it to animals or monks.

不久當棄，何用水為？」

Soon you will discard it, so what is the use of water?"

比丘便壞彼水器，以惡心故得越比尼罪。

The monk then breaks the water container, incurring a minor offense due to evil intent.

若人家中以器儲水，若比丘親里知識被燒，

If at a person's home, water is stored and a monk's relatives or acquaintance's place is burning,

比丘以盜心，取水救火，若觸，得越比尼罪；

If, with a thieving mind, the monk takes water to extinguish the fire and touches it, it's a minor offense;

動彼水器，得偷蘭罪；

Moving the water container is a lesser offense;

以水澆火滿者，波羅夷。

Pouring water on the fire until it's out is a grave offense.

若憶念言：「當還水。」若與直取用，不犯。

If remembering to say, "I will return the water," or receiving permission to take it, there's no offense.

若彼家被燒，即以彼水助澆火者，不犯。

If that house is burning and using the water to help extinguish the fire, there's no offense.

若時世遭旱十年、二十年，有人守護池水、若井水，

If a time of drought lasts ten or twenty years, and someone guards pond or well water,

比丘以盜心持器取水，觸彼水者越比尼罪；

If a monk with a thieving mind carries a vessel to take water and touches the water, it’s a minor offense;

盛水時，偷蘭罪；

Drawing water incurs a lesser offense;

若擔水離池，滿者，波羅夷。

Carrying water away from the pond until it's gone is a grave offense.

若池有院閉門，比丘以盜心持筒遙飲水，水連續不斷，滿者，波羅夷；

If the pond is fenced with a closed gate, and the monk with a thieving mind drinks water from a distance with a tube and water is continuous, it’s a grave offense;

口口飲息者，口口偷蘭罪。

If he drinks sip by sip with pauses, each sip incurs a lesser offense.

若井水，比丘以盜心下罐時，得越比尼罪；

For well water, when the monk with a thieving mind lowers a jar, it's a minor offense;

若水入器時，得偷蘭罪；

As water enters the container, it's a lesser offense;

持水離井，滿者，波羅夷。

Carrying water away from the well until full is a grave offense.

有諸外道家以器儲水，

There are external paths storing water in containers,

其家被燒外道荒懼，

and their house is burning, and they panic,

比丘爾時便作是念：「如是如是子惡邪外道，

the monk then thinks, "Such and such evil wicked heretics,

常妬佛法毀呰沙門釋子，今當中汝。」

always jealous of the Buddha's teachings, criticizing monks and followers, now I have you."

便前以杖打水器破，以惡心壞他物故，得越比尼罪。

Then he approaches and breaks the water container with a stick, due to evil intent to destroy others’ property, incurring a minor offense.

有諸名水，所謂瞻波國有恒水、

There are famous waters, such as the constant water of Jambudvīpa,

王舍城有溫泉水、

the hot spring water of Rājagṛha,

巴連弗邑有恕奴河水、

the Snu River water of Bālaṭṭhapura,

波羅奈國有佛遊行池水、

the Buddha's wandering pond water of Vārāṇasī,

沙祇國有玄注水、

the dark-flowing water of Śākya,

舍衛城有蒲多梨水、

the Paudarī water of Śrāvastī,

摩偷羅國有搖蒲那水、

the Swayambhū water of Mathurā,

僧伽舍國有石蜜水。

the stone honey water of Saṅkāśya.

有諸貴人，遣使取此諸水在道止息，

Nobles send envoys to fetch these waters and rest on the way,

有比丘為渴所逼，以盜心，觸彼水者，得越比尼罪；

a monk, pressed by thirst, with a thieving mind touches the water, incurring a minor offense;

水入器中，偷蘭罪；

Water entering a container incurs a lesser offense;

若水注斷滿者，波羅夷。

If the water stream breaks fully, it’s a grave offense.

若水注未斷，中起悔心畏犯重罪，以水還倒本器者，得偷蘭罪。

If the water stream is not yet broken, and with repentant fear of committing a severe offense, one returns the water to its original container, it's a lesser offense.

有諸貴人，遊戲園中作香池水，

Nobles in the garden create fragrant pool water,

有比丘以盜心取彼水，而水不直錢，

a monk with a thieving mind takes that water, and the water has no direct monetary value,

計其香價隨時犯罪，是謂水。

measuring its fragrance value at the time of the offense, this is called water.



水中物者，有物在水中生，所謂優鉢羅、鉢曇摩、拘物頭、分陀利、須健提、藕根等，及餘種種水生物。
Aquatic creatures include those that grow in water, such as utpala, padma, kumuda, pundarika, shukti, lotus roots, and various other aquatic beings.

若比丘以盜心，觸此諸水中生物者，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk with theft in mind touches any of these aquatic creatures, he commits an offense of defiant conduct; if he moves them, he incurs a thullaccaya offense; if he completely removes them from their original place, it is an act of defeat.

若一花直滿者，波羅夷；不滿者，一一偷蘭罪。
If one flower is plucked and it is worth a full measure, it is an act of defeat; if it is less than a full measure, each instance incurs a thullaccaya offense.

但取花著地，未波羅夷；花束大重不能勝，曳去雖遠，未波羅夷；舉離地，波羅夷。
Simply picking a flower and placing it on the ground is not yet an act of defeat; if the bunch is too heavy to be carried, dragging it away even a long distance is not an act of defeat; but if lifted off the ground, it is an act of defeat.

乃至一切水生物亦復如是。
The same applies to all aquatic beings.

若諸貴人於遊戲浴池中，作金銀花及諸戲船、鳧鴈、鴛鴦異類之鳥，若比丘以盜心，觸彼物時，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If noble people create golden or silver flowers, as well as play boats, ducks, geese, and various kinds of birds in a bathing pool for amusement, and a monk with theft in mind touches those items, he commits an offense of defiant conduct; if he moves them, he incurs a thullaccaya offense; if he completely removes them from their original place, it is an act of defeat.

若復持金銀、瑠璃、車𤦲、馬瑙、珊瑚、琥珀、珂貝、赤寶及餘八種，若人持此眾物藏著水中，比丘以盜心，觸彼物者，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If someone hides gold, silver, beryl, crystal, agate, coral, amber, conch, ruby, and eight other types of precious objects in the water and a monk with theft in mind touches them, he commits an offense of defiant conduct; if he moves them, he incurs a thullaccaya offense; if he completely removes them from their original place, it is an act of defeat.

是名水中物。
These are called aquatic assets.




船物者，毘俱羅船、俱呵吒船、拔瞿梨船、毘尸伽船、馬面船、象面船、魚面船、羊面船；

Ship items include vessels like the Vikura ship, Kuhecha ship, Pujari ship, Pisika ship, horse-faced ship, elephant-faced ship, fish-faced ship, and sheep-faced ship;

或一重乃至七重，或有壁、或無壁者，若載象船、載馬船、載財物船、載瓦器船、載皮船、載鐵器船乃至𮆛栰。

They might be single-layered or up to seven-layered, either with walls or without, used for carrying elephants, horses, goods, ceramic wares, leather, iron tools, and even rafts.

若是船筏繫著一處，若比丘盜心，觸彼船，得越比尼罪；

If a raft or ship is moored in one place and a monk intends to steal, upon touching the ship they incur a minor transgression;

若動彼船，偷蘭罪；

If they move the ship, it is a serious transgression;

離本處，波羅夷。

If it leaves its original location, it is a major transgression.

雖復斷繩、船未離本處者，偷蘭罪；

Even if the rope is cut but the ship hasn't left its original place, it is a serious transgression;

雖復離處、未斷繩者，亦偷蘭罪；

Even if it leaves without cutting the rope, it is also a serious transgression;

若斷繩、離本處者，波羅夷。

If the rope is cut and the ship leaves its original place, it is a major transgression.

若本欲盜船不盜物，畏人覺故合物乘去，雖離本處，未波羅夷；

If the original intent is to steal the ship but not the goods, yet the goods are taken due to fear of being caught, even if it leaves, it isn't a major transgression;

若捨物已船離本處，波羅夷。

If the goods are discarded and the ship leaves its place, it is a major transgression.

若本欲盜物不盜船，畏人覺故合船乘去，未波羅夷；

If the original intent is to steal goods but not the ship, yet the ship is taken due to fear of being caught, it isn't a major transgression;

捨船已持物去者，波羅夷。

If the ship is discarded and the goods taken, it is a major transgression.

若欲船物合盜者，船離本處，波羅夷。

If both the ship and goods are intended to be stolen, and the ship leaves its place, it is a major transgression.

若欲水底持去者，沒時波羅夷。

If intending to take it by sinking, it is a major transgression upon submersion.

若有人繫船岸邊於屏處坐，有比丘欲盜船，

If someone ties the ship to the shore and sits hidden while a monk intends to steal the ship,

時有餘人語船主言：「有出家人欲盜汝船。」

Others may inform the ship owner saying, "A monk intends to steal your ship."

時船主問言：「何道出家？」

The ship owner asks, "From which order is the monk?"

答言：「沙門釋子。」

They reply, "The monk is a disciple of the Shakya."

船主言：「無苦！沙門釋子不與不取。」

The ship owner says, "No worry! Disciples of the Shakya do not take without permission."

是時比丘身以觸船時，異人復語船主言：「是比丘已取汝船。」

At this time, as the monk touches the ship, others again say to the owner, "This monk has taken your ship."

船主便疑：「是比丘將無欲盜我船耶？」

The ship owner suspects, "Isn't this monk intending to steal my ship?"

即起問言：「尊者！欲作何等？」

He then rises and asks, "Venerable sir! What are you intending?"

時比丘默然不應，便以篙擿船而去。

The monk remains silent and the ship is poled away.

船主追喚言：「尊者！莫乘船去，是船是王、若大臣、若婆羅門、長者、居士許，是作福船、是渡人船。」

The owner calls out, "Venerable sir! Do not sail away, this ship is permitted by the king, ministers, brahmins, elders, householders; it is a ship for merit, for ferrying people."

又復恐怖比丘言：「弊惡人！汝若乘我船去者，我後當苦治汝。」

He frightens the monk further saying, "Wicked man! If you take my ship, I shall punish you severely."

是比丘雖乘船去遠，而船主不作失想，比丘亦不作得想，未波羅夷；

Though the monk sails far, if the owner doesn't regard it as a loss and the monk doesn't regard it as a gain, it is not a major transgression;

船主若作失想，比丘作得想者，波羅夷。

If the owner considers it a loss and the monk considers it a gain, it is a major transgression.

若船主繫船著岸邊，有客比丘來語船主言：「長壽！借我船渡。」

If the ship owner ties the ship to the shore and a visiting monk says to the owner, "Long life! Lend me the ship for crossing."

船主答言：「我獨一人，那得相渡？」

The owner replies, "I am alone, how can I ferry you?"

比丘復言：「長壽！我食時欲至，莫令我失食。汝今渡我者，便為與我食，便為施我樂。我今與汝今世後世更互相渡。」

The monk further says, "Long life! I need to reach the mealtime, do not let me miss it. If you ferry me now, it will be like giving me food and joy. We will mutually ferry each other in this life and the next."

船主復言：「汝亦無雇直，云何而欲虛渡？汝脚如餓烏東西不住，誰當渡汝？」

The owner replies, "You have no payment, how can you expect a free ride? Your feet are like a hungry crow, restless, who will ferry you?"

比丘又復卑辭苦求，船主復言：「自可度，尊者今正一人，何辦相渡？」

The monk humbly pleads again, and the owner replies, "You can cross by yourself, Venerable, you are just one person, why need assistance?"

比丘答言：「長壽！汝但捉柁，我自作力。」

The monk replies, "Long life! You hold the rudder, I will do the rowing."

船主即許，便喚大德上船。

The owner agrees and calls the monk aboard.

彼至河中，比丘捉杖便打彼船主罵言：「弊惡人敢毀辱沙門釋子。」

Upon reaching the middle of the river, the monk takes a stick and beats the owner, saying, "Wicked man, dare you insult a disciple of the Shakya?"

罵訖傷打船主手臂脚腨傷破勞熟，已便排著水中，得偷蘭罪；

After cursing, the monk wounds and beats the owner's arms and legs until bruised and swollen, then pushes him into the water, committing a serious transgression;

船主若死，比丘先有殺心者，波羅夷；

If the owner dies and the monk had murderous intent, it is a major transgression;

若先無殺心，偷蘭罪。

If there was no murderous intent, it is a serious transgression.

爾時比丘若盜彼船，若盜行具滿者，波羅夷；

At that time, if the monk steals the ship or fully equipped goods, it is a major transgression;

不滿，偷蘭罪。

If not fully equipped, it is a serious transgression.

若比丘惡心沈彼船、若破彼船、若放隨流去，以壞失他物故，得越比尼罪。

If with malice the monk sinks, breaks, or lets the ship drift away, causing the owner to lose property, it is a minor transgression.

有人為福故，常以船渡人。

Some, for merit, always use ships to ferry people.

比丘若渡，應繫著岸邊，令後人得渡。

Monks, if ferried, should anchor at the shore so others can also cross.

若比丘盜彼船，若行具滿者，波羅夷；

If a monk steals the ship or fully equipped goods, it is a major transgression;

若沒著水中，若破、若放令隨流去，得越比尼罪。

If it sinks, is broken, or is released to drift away, it is a minor transgression.

比丘若乘栰渡至彼岸，當牽栰著岸上現處，令後人得渡，莫著屏猥處，是名船物。

If a monk crosses by raft, he should pull it ashore at its original spot, so others can cross, not leaving it in a hidden or unsafe place, which is the rule regarding vessel items.



船上物者，船上所有諸物，
On the ship are all the various items,

謂金銀、真珠、錢財、虎珀、琉璃、珂貝、珊瑚、車𤦲、赤寶縷、劫貝，
namely gold, silver, pearls, money, amber, glass, shells, coral, agate, red gemstones, and precious cowries,

乃至一切衣服穀食及八種物，
as well as all clothing, grain, and eight kinds of items,

若覆藏、若不覆藏，
whether covered or not,

比丘以盜心，觸彼船上諸物，得越比尼罪；
if a monk with an intention to steal touches these items on the ship, he commits a lesser offense;

若動彼物者，偷蘭罪；
if he moves these items, it is an intermediate offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
if he completely removes them from their original place, it is a serious offense.



乘者，若車乘、若輿、若輦、若步挽車，乃至小兒戲車，是名為乘。
Vehicles include carriages, chariots, palanquins, hand-pulled wagons, and even children's toy carts.

若盜兩輪車，順牽後過前，滿者，波羅夷。
If one steals a two-wheeled vehicle and pulls it forward, one commits a serious offense if it's fully moved.

若逆推前過，後滿者，波羅夷。
If it is pushed backward and the rear crosses, one commits a serious offense if fully moved.

若傍牽左輪過右輪、右輪過左輪，滿者，波羅夷。
If pulling sideways causes the left wheel to pass the right one or vice versa, one commits a serious offense if fully moved.

若比丘壞彼乘，稍稍取，若盜一一木，滿者，波羅夷；不滿者，偷蘭罪。
If a monk destroys a vehicle and gradually takes it, or steals its parts, a grave offense is committed if fully taken; otherwise, it's a lesser stealing offense.

若小乘可全檐去者，若觸，得越比尼罪；動彼乘，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
For a small vehicle that can be fully removed, touching incurs a minor transgression; moving it incurs a lesser stealing offense; if fully removed, a grave offense is committed.

是名乘物。
This is called "vehicle".



乘上物者，若師子皮覆、虎皮覆、黃欽婆羅覆，及諸種種覆物，一切敷具、一切莊嚴乘物。
Objects placed on top include items covered with lion skins, tiger skins, yellow woolen covers, and various other covers; all bedding and decorations for transportation.

乘上一切物者，所謂金銀、琉璃、車𤦲、馬瑙、真珠、珂貝、珊瑚、琥珀及赤寶等，衣被飲食及八種物，若覆藏、若不覆藏，
All items placed on top include gold, silver, lapis lazuli, carnelian, agate, pearls, conch shells, coral, amber, and rubies; clothing, bedding, food, and eight types of items, whether covered or not.

比丘以盜心，觸彼物者，越比尼罪；
If a monk, with a mind to steal, touches these objects, it constitutes a minor offense.

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves those objects, it constitutes a severe offense.

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he completely removes them from their original place, it constitutes a major offense.

是名乘上物。
These are called objects placed on top.



四足物者，所謂象馬、駝牛、驢騾、羊乃至鼠狼。
Quadrupeds refer to animals such as elephants, horses, camels, cattle, donkeys, mules, sheep, and even mice and wolves.

若比丘欲盜象，若牽、若驅、舉一足乃至三脚，偷蘭罪；四足離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk desires to steal an elephant, whether by pulling, driving, or lifting one to three legs, it is a minor offense; if all four legs leave their original place, it is a grave offense.

如是馬駝乃至羊亦如是。
The same applies to horses, camels, and even sheep.

若小可全擔者，若觸，得越比尼罪；若動者，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
For small animals that can be entirely carried, if touched, it is an exceedance offense; if moved, it is a minor offense; if fully removed from their place, it is a grave offense.

是名四足物。
These are termed quadrupeds.




四足上物者，莊嚴象具乃至莊嚴鼠狼具及八種物，若覆藏、若不覆藏，若比丘以盜心，觸此諸物，越比尼罪；
Four-legged superior items include those used to adorn elephants down to ornaments for weasels in eight varieties. If hidden or uncovered, and a monk with a stealing intent touches these items, it constitutes a minor offense;

若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；
If he moves those items, it results in a small theft offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If moved entirely from their original location, it constitutes a grave offense.

是名四足上物。
These are called four-legged superior items.




兩足物者，所謂人及鳥等，
Two-legged beings, such as humans and birds,

若比丘盜彼人，及誘去、若刀杖驅，
If a monk steals a person or entices them away or drives them with a stick or sword,

舉一足偷蘭罪，
Raising one foot is a Thullaccaya offense,

舉兩足波羅夷。
Raising both feet is a Parajika offense.

若小可擔負者，若觸，越比尼罪；
If it is something small that can be carried, touching it is a Dukkata offense;

若動偷蘭罪；
If it is moved, it is a Thullaccaya offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If it is completely removed from its place, it is a Parajika offense.

乃至鳥亦如是。
This is also the case even with birds.

是為兩足物。
This is what is meant by two-legged beings.




足上物者，所謂女人莊嚴具，男子莊嚴具，乃至鸚鵡鳥莊嚴具。
The items on both feet are said to be adornments for women, adornments for men, and even adornments for parrots.

女人莊嚴具者，釵釧衣服等，
Women's adornments include hairpins, bracelets, clothes, etc.

男子莊嚴具者，衣冠瓔珞等，
Men's adornments include clothes, headdresses, necklaces, etc.

乃至鸚鵡鳥莊嚴具者，種種珠鈴等繫其頸脚，
Even parrot adornments, such as various pearl bells tied to their necks and feet,

及餘八種物，若覆藏、若不覆藏，
And other eight kinds of items, whether concealed or not concealed,

比丘以盜心，觸彼兩足上物者，得越比尼罪；
If a monk with a mind to steal touches those items on both feet, he commits a transgression.

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves the items, he commits the act of Stealing.

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he removes them completely from their original place, he is guilty of a serious offense.

是名兩足上物。
This is called the items on both feet.



無足物者，所謂蛇蟒，食花、食果、食肉、吸氣等。
Animals without feet refer to creatures like snakes and pythons, which eat flowers, fruits, meat, and inhale air.

蛇若著瓶中、若著篋中。
If a snake is placed in a bottle or in a box.

有一比丘，本是弄蛇師，後出家，此比丘欲盜彼蛇，
There was a monk who used to be a snake handler and later became ordained. This monk wanted to steal a snake,

即欲取蛇，恐其主覺，舉篋持去，未波羅夷；
He intended to take the snake, but feared being discovered by the owner, so he carried the box away. This is not considered a Parajika offense.

若出蛇離篋，滿者，波羅夷。
If he releases the snake from the box, it fulfills a Parajika offense.

若本欲盜篋不盜蛇，畏主覺故合蛇持去，未波羅夷；
If his original intention was to steal the box and not the snake, but due to fear of being discovered he carries the snake, it is not a Parajika offense.

若棄蛇持篋去，滿者，波羅夷。
If he abandons the snake and takes the box, it fulfills a Parajika offense.

若欲蛇篋合盜者，擔去離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he intends to steal both the snake and the box, and he carries them away from their original place, it fulfills a Parajika offense.

若盜瓶中蛇，蛇尾未離瓶口者，未波羅夷；
If he steals a snake from a bottle, and the snake's tail has not left the mouth of the bottle, it is not a Parajika offense.

若頭尾都離滿者，波羅夷。
If both the head and tail have left, it fulfills a Parajika offense.

若瞋嫌彼便罵言：「惡人何以籠繫眾生？」
If in anger he criticizes the person saying, "Why do evil people imprison living beings?"

即開瓶令蛇得出者，得越比尼罪。
And he opens the bottle to release the snake, he commits a Dukkat offense.

比丘盜心觸無足物者，越比尼罪；
When a monk with intent to steal touches a legless animal, he commits a Dukkat offense.

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves that creature, he commits a Thullaccaya offense.

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he removes the creature from its original place, it fulfills a Parajika offense.

是名無足物。
This is known as an animal without feet.



無足上物者，所謂金銀、真珠、車𤦲、琥珀、珊瑚、珂貝、琉璃、赤寶，乃至八種物，

Things of which there is no peer are known as gold, silver, pearls, jade, amber, coral, shell, crystal, and ruby, encompassing eight types of objects.

若覆藏、若不覆藏，人畏是無足物故無敢取者，

Whether they are covered or not, people fear these unattainable items and thus do not dare to take them.

比丘以盜心，觸此無足上物者，得越比尼罪；

If a monk, with an intention to steal, touches these noteworthy items, he incurs a transgression offense;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；

If he moves them, he commits the offense of thievery;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。

If he completely removes them from their original place, it is a grave offense.

是名無足上物。

These are known as unmatched items.




虛空物者，所謂菴羅樹、薝蔔樹、閻浮樹、椰子樹、只波羅樹、龍花樹、吉祥果樹，乃至一切諸花果樹。
Empty objects refer to trees like mango trees, sandalwood trees, jambudvipa trees, coconut trees, parijata trees, naga trees, auspicious fruit trees, and all flower and fruit trees.

若比丘以盜心，盜此諸樹，若一樹滿者，波羅夷；不滿者隨其拔樹栽，偷蘭罪。
If a monk, with a thieving mind, steals these trees, he incurs a Parajika offense if the tree is mature; if not mature, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

若拔樹栽積在一處，未波羅夷；舉離地滿者，波羅夷。
If he uproots a tree and stacks them in one place, he has not committed a Parajika offense; if he raises it off the ground when mature, he incurs a Parajika offense.

若重不能勝，曳去不離地，雖遠，未波羅夷；若舉離地，波羅夷。
If it's too heavy to lift and is dragged without leaving the ground, even far, he has not committed a Parajika offense; if it leaves the ground, he incurs a Parajika offense.

若比丘盜心，觸此虛空物，得越比尼罪；若動，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with a thieving mind, touches these empty objects, he incurs a Pratidesaniya offense; if they move, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense; if removed from their original place when mature, he incurs a Parajika offense.

是名虛空物。
These are known as empty objects.

虛空中物者，所謂菴羅果乃至吉祥果，若比丘盜心，食此諸果，若食一果滿者，波羅夷；若不滿者，口口偷蘭罪。
Empty space objects refer to fruits like mangoes to auspicious fruits. If a monk, with a thieving mind, eats these fruits and they are ripe, he incurs a Parajika offense; if not ripe, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense per bite.

比丘動樹落果在地，未波羅夷；若取果持去滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk moves a tree causing fruit to fall to the ground, he has not incurred a Parajika offense; if he takes the fruit away mature, he incurs a Parajika offense.

二人偷果，一人上樹落果，一人在下拾果，未波羅夷；若樹上人下樹，持果去滿者，波羅夷。
Two people stealing fruit: if one climbs the tree and makes the fruit fall, and the other picks it up, they have not incurred a Parajika offense; if the one in the tree comes down and takes the fruit away mature, he incurs a Parajika offense.

取一切諸果亦如是。
The same applies to all kinds of fruit.

若佛生處、若得道處、轉法輪處、尊者阿難大會處、羅睺羅大會處、般闍于瑟大會處，是諸處皆種行樹，樹上各各以眾寶莊嚴其樹，及八種物，若覆藏、若不覆藏。
In places where the Buddha was born, attained enlightenment, turned the wheel of dharma, where the venerable Ananda gathered, where Rahula gathered, where Purnavardhana gathered, trees were planted and adorned with various jewels, along with eight kinds of objects, whether covered or not.

若比丘以盜心，觸彼眾寶者，得越比尼罪；動彼物，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with a thieving mind, touches those jewels, he incurs a Pratidesaniya offense; if moved, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense; if removed from their original place when mature, he incurs a Parajika offense.

是名虛空中物。
These are known as empty space objects.

是謂十六種物。
This is called sixteen kinds of objects.

若比丘以盜心，觸彼物，越比尼罪；若動彼物，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with a thieving mind, touches them, he incurs a Pratidesaniya offense; if moved, a Sanghadisesa offense; if removed from their original place when mature, a Parajika offense.



復有十三種分齊物。
Furthermore, there are thirteen categories of distinguishing objects.

何等十三？
What are these thirteen?

一、物分齊；
1. Distinction by objects;

二、處分齊；
2. Distinction by place;

三、不定分齊；
3. Indeterminate distinction;

四、垣牆分齊；
4. Distinction by walls;

五、籠分齊；
5. Distinction by enclosures;

六、寄分齊；
6. Distinction by deposit;

七、雜分齊；
7. Miscellaneous distinction;

八、幡分齊；
8. Distinction by banners;

九、相因分齊；
9. Distinction by causal relation;

十、杙分齊；
10. Distinction by stakes;

十一、園分齊；
11. Distinction by gardens;

十二、賊分齊；
12. Distinction by theft;

十三、稅分齊。
13. Distinction by taxes.




物分齊者物有八種。
There are eight kinds of categories.

何等八？
What are the eight?

一、時藥，
1. Timely medicine,

二、夜分藥，
2. Night-time medicine,

三、七日藥，
3. Seven-day medicine,

四、終身藥，
4. Lifelong medicine,

五、隨物，
5. Necessary items,

六、重物，
6. Heavy items,

七、不淨物，
7. Impure items,

八、淨不淨物，
8. Pure and impure items,

是名物分齊。
These are called categories.

若比丘以盜心，觸此諸物，得越比尼罪；
If a monk, with a mind of theft, touches these items, he commits a Vinaya offense;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he moves the items, he commits the offense of Thullaccaya;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he removes them from their place, he commits the Parajika offense.




處分齊者，地、地中物，水、水中物，船、船中物，乘、乘中物，四足、四足上物，兩足、兩足上物，無足、無足上物，空、空中物，是名處分齊。
The objects to be distributed are the land, objects within the earth, water, objects in the water, boats, objects within the boats, vehicles, objects within the vehicles, four-legged creatures and what is on them, two-legged creatures and what is on them, creatures with no legs and what is on them, the sky and what is in it, which are called objects of distribution.

若比丘盜心，觸此諸物，得越比尼罪；
If a monk, with the intention of stealing, touches these objects, he commits a pārājika offense;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
If he merely moves the objects, he commits a saṃghāvaśeṣa offense;

若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If he fully separates them from their original place, it is a pārājika offense.



不定分齐者，如所说知而妄语，波夜提；非知而妄语，皆波夜提。
The uncertain distinctions: If speaking falsehood knowingly as described, it is a Prāyaścitta offense; if unknowingly, it is still a Prāyaścitta offense.

或知而妄语，波罗夷；或知而妄语，僧伽婆尸沙；或知而妄语，偷兰罪；或知而妄语，越比尼罪；或知而妄语，波夜提。
In some cases, knowingly speaking falsehood is a Pārājika offense; in others, it is a Saṅghāvaśeṣa offense, a Sthūlātyaya offense, a Duṣkṛta offense, or a Prāyaścitta offense.

知而妄语波罗夷者，若比丘不实得过人法，自言：「我得阿罗汉。」是知而妄语非波夜提，是波罗夷。
Knowing and falsely claiming a Pārājika offense, if a monk falsely claims to have attained a superhuman Dharma, saying, "I have achieved Arhatship," this is knowing falsehood and is a Pārājika offense, not just a Prāyaścitta.

知而妄语僧伽婆尸沙者，若比丘以无根波罗夷罪谤清净比丘，是知而妄语非波夜提，是僧伽婆尸沙。
Knowing and falsely accusing a monk of a rootless Pārājika offense, such falsehood is not just a Prāyaścitta offense, but a Saṅghāvaśeṣa offense.

知而妄语偷兰罪者，比丘说言：「我阿罗汉。」是知而妄语非波夜提，是偷兰罪。
Knowingly speaking falsehood of Sthūlātyaya offense, if a monk says, "I am an Arhat," this is knowing falsehood, not just a Prāyaścitta offense, but a Sthūlātyaya offense.

知而妄语越比尼罪者，比丘自作是言：「谓我是阿罗汉耶？」是知而妄语非波夜提，是越比尼罪。
Knowingly speaking falsehood of Duṣkṛta offense, if a monk makes the statement, "Do you think I'm an Arhat?" this is knowing falsehood, not just a Prāyaścitta offense, but a Duṣkṛta offense.

知而妄语波夜提者，除上尔所事，余一切妄语者，此是知而妄语波夜提。
Knowingly speaking falsehood as Prāyaścitta, aside from the above cases, all other falsehoods are knowing falsehoods and are a Prāyaścitta offense.

又复有伤杀草木，波罗夷；有伤杀草木，偷兰罪；有伤杀草木，波夜提。
There are harms and killings of vegetation as a Pārājika offense, a Sthūlātyaya offense, or a Prāyaścitta offense.

有伤杀草木波罗夷者，如树木花果有主守护，比丘盗心取伤杀草木，非波夜提，满者是波罗夷。
Injuring or killing vegetation as a Pārājika offense, such as when trees, flowers, or fruits have owners or guardians, a monk taking or harming them with theft in mind, if complete, it is not a Prāyaścitta but a Pārājika.

伤杀草木偷兰罪者，若树木花果有主守护，比丘盗心取，若不满者，非波夜提，是偷兰罪。
Injuring or killing vegetation as a Sthūlātyaya offense, if the amount taken is not complete, it is not a Prāyaścitta but a Sthūlātyaya offense.

伤杀草木波夜提者，伤杀一切草木，波夜提。
Causing harm to all vegetation is a Prāyaścitta offense.

又复非一切非时食，波夜提；有非时食波罗夷、有非时食偷兰罪、有非时食波夜提。
Also, not all out-of-time eating is a Prāyaścitta offense; there is out-of-time eating as a Pārājika, a Sthūlātyaya offense, or a Prāyaścitta offense.

非时食波罗夷者，若比丘盗心，取他食非时噉，满者非波夜提，是波罗夷。
Out-of-time eating as a Pārājika offense, if a monk with theft in mind takes another's food to eat out-of-time, if complete, it is not a Prāyaścitta but a Pārājika offense.

非时食偷兰罪者，若比丘盗心，取他食非时噉，不满者非波夜提，是偷兰罪。
Out-of-time eating as a Sthūlātyaya offense, if the amount taken is not complete, it is not a Prāyaścitta but a Sthūlātyaya offense.

非时食波夜提者，若比丘以理得食非时噉，波夜提。
Out-of-time eating as a Prāyaścitta offense, if a monk legally obtains food to eat out-of-time, it is a Prāyaścitta offense.

又复饮酒，非一切波夜提；有饮酒波罗夷、有饮酒偷兰罪、有饮酒波夜提。
Also, not all drinking of alcohol is a Prāyaścitta offense; there is drinking alcohol as a Pārājika, a Sthūlātyaya offense, or a Prāyaścitta offense.

饮酒波罗夷者，若比丘盗心，取他酒饮，满者，波罗夷。
Drinking alcohol as a Pārājika offense, if a monk with theft in mind takes another's alcohol to drink, if complete, it is a Pārājika offense.

饮酒偷兰罪者，若比丘盗心，取他酒饮，不满，偷兰罪。
Drinking alcohol as a Sthūlātyaya offense, if the amount taken is not complete, it is a Sthūlātyaya offense.

饮酒波夜提者，若比丘以理得酒，饮者，波夜提。
Drinking alcohol as a Prāyaścitta offense, if a monk legally obtains alcohol to drink, it is a Prāyaścitta offense.

若比丘于不定分齐物，若盗心触，得越比尼罪；若动彼物，偷兰罪；若离本处，满者，波罗夷。
If a monk with theft in mind touches uncertain worldly possessions, he incurs a Duṣkṛta offense; if he moves the item, it is a Sthūlātyaya offense; if he takes it from its place, if complete, it is a Pārājika offense.

是名不定分齐。
This is called uncertain distinctions.



垣牆分齊者，象廐、馬廐、駝廐、驢牛羊欄；

The boundaries of walls distinguish the elephant stables, horse stables, camel stables, donkey, cattle, and sheep pens;

蘆蔔園、菜園、瓜園、甘蔗園，若比丘盜心，取彼象，

Radish gardens, vegetable gardens, melon gardens, sugarcane gardens, if a monk has a mind to steal, and takes an elephant,

象舉一足乃至四足度廐門，身分未離門者，偷蘭罪；

If the elephant lifts one to four feet over the stable door, but its body has not left the door, it is a stealing fault;

身分離門，波羅夷。乃至驢亦如是。

If the body passes the door, it is a Pārājika offense. Even a donkey is treated the same.

若比丘盜心，取他羊，驅羊驚走、瞋羊打殺者，波夜提。

If a monk has a mind to steal another's sheep, drives the sheep to frighten it, or hits the sheep to death, it is a Pācittiya offense.

若比丘割肉擲籬外，未波羅夷；

If a monk cuts the meat and throws it outside the fence, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

比丘出籬外擔肉離地，滿者，波羅夷。

If the monk goes outside the fence and lifts the meat from the ground, it is a Pārājika offense.

若就欄中食肉，滿者，波羅夷。

If eating meat inside the pen, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘二人盜羊，一人籬外、一人籬內，

If two monks steal a sheep, one outside the fence and one inside the fence,

割肉擲欄外，未波羅夷；

If they cut the meat and throw it outside the pen, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

彼出已舉肉離地，滿者，波羅夷。

If they go out and lift the meat from the ground, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘盜心，取蘆蔔根，若拔一根，滿者，波羅夷；

If a monk has a mind to steal and takes a radish root, pulling one root out fully, it is a Pārājika offense;

若不滿者，拔時根根偷蘭罪。

If less than full, each root pulled out incurs a stealing fault.

若拔積大聚，未波羅夷；持舉離園，波羅夷。

If pulling from a large pile, it is not yet a Pārājika offense; but carrying away from the garden, it is a Pārājika offense.

若拔束大重不能勝，曳去雖遠，未波羅夷；

If unable to lift a heavy bundle and drags it a long distance away, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

若離地，滿者，波羅夷。

If lifted off the ground, it is a Pārājika offense.

一切菜乃至瓜亦如是。

The same applies to all vegetables and melons.

若比丘盜心，取他甘蔗時食一甘蔗，滿者，波羅夷；

If a monk takes another's sugarcane with a mind to steal and eats one sugarcane, it is a Pārājika offense;

若不滿者，根根偷蘭罪。

If less than full, each root incurs a stealing fault.

若截著籬外時，未波羅夷，是波夜提；

If cut and left outside the fence, it is not yet a Pārājika, but a Pācittiya offense;

若出園持去，滿者，波羅夷。

If taken out of the garden, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘以盜心作巧詐，以甘蔗繫脚曳去，雖遠未波羅夷；

If a monk uses deceit with a mind to steal, tying sugarcane to a foot and dragging it away, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

若離地滿者，波羅夷。

If lifted off the ground, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘一人園外、一人園內，擲甘蔗園外，未波羅夷；

If one monk is outside the garden and one inside, and they throw sugarcane outside the garden, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

若彼出已舉離地，滿者，波羅夷。

If they go out and lift it off the ground, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘持甘蔗去時，莖葉觸園未離者，未波羅夷；

If a monk takes sugarcane with stalk or leaves touching the garden and not yet separated, it is not yet a Pārājika offense;

離已，波羅夷。

Once separated, it is a Pārājika offense.

若比丘盜心觸此諸物，得越比尼罪；

If a monk touches these objects with a mind to steal, it incurs a minor offense;

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；

If moves the objects, it incurs a stealing fault;

若離本處，滿者，波羅夷。

If moved from their original place, it is a Pārājika offense.




籠分齊者，所謂鸚鵡等種種鳥、師子等種種獸。
"Cage assortments refer to various birds like parrots and various animals like lions."

若比丘盜心，取彼諸鳥時，若欲盜鳥不盜籠，畏人覺故合籠持去者，未波羅夷；
"If a monk, with the intention of stealing, takes the birds but not the cage, and fearing detection takes the cage along, he has not committed a major offense."

若捨籠持鳥去，滿者，波羅夷。
"If he leaves the cage and takes the bird, then he commits a major offense."

若欲盜籠不盜鳥，畏人覺故合鳥持去，未波羅夷；
"If intending to steal the cage but not the bird, and fearing detection takes the bird along, he has not committed a major offense."

若出鳥持籠去，滿者，波羅夷。
"If he releases the bird and takes the cage, then he commits a major offense."

若籠鳥合盜者，持去離本處，滿者，波羅夷。
"If he steals both cage and bird and carries them away from their original place, it is a major offense."

若比丘盜心，取鳥內手籠中，得越比尼罪；
"If a monk, with the intention to steal, puts his hand in the cage, he commits a minor offense."

挽一脚出，偷蘭罪；
"If he pulls out one leg, he commits a lesser offense."

兩脚出翅尾未出籠口，未波羅夷；
"If both legs are out but the wings and tail are not yet out of the cage, it is not a major offense."

離已滿者，波羅夷。
"If they are fully out, he commits a major offense."

若比丘盜心，取師子內手欄中，越比尼罪；
"If a monk, intending to steal, puts his hand inside the lion's cage, he commits a minor offense."

挽一脚出偷蘭罪；
"If he pulls out one leg, it is a lesser offense."

乃至四脚出尾未離欄，未波羅夷；
"Even if the four legs are out but the tail has not left the cage, it is not a major offense."

離已，波羅夷。
"If it is fully out, he commits a major offense."

一切獸亦如是。
"The same applies to all animals."

若比丘盜心，觸彼籠分齊物，得越比尼罪；
"If a monk, with the intention to steal, touches the cage assortment item, he commits a minor offense."

若動彼物，偷蘭罪；
"If he moves the item, he commits a lesser offense."

若離本處，滿者，波羅夷。
"If it is taken away from its original place, it is a major offense."



寄分齊者，若和上、阿闍梨、弟子、知識，寄物互相餉致，若鉢若衣及餘諸物，若受寄者作是念：「寄者已遠，所與者不知，此物我自取。」即生盜心取，從地著膝上、從膝著地、從左肩著右肩，乃至從頭著肩，一一移，滿者，波羅夷。
When practitioners, such as preceptors, teachers, disciples, or acquaintances, mutually exchange or entrust items like bowls or robes and other things, if the recipient thinks, "The depositor is far away, the giver is unaware, I can take this for myself," and conceives a mind to steal, moving the item from the ground to the knee, from the knee to the ground, from the left shoulder to the right shoulder, or even from the head to the shoulder, moving it piece by piece, then it is a Parajika offense.

若比丘受寄已，或渡河、或渡池、或渡澇水、或復逢雨，恐衣濕故便出看之，見彼衣好作是念言：「彼寄者已遠，前人不知，此物我當自取。」即生盜心取，從地著膝上、從膝著地、從左肩著右肩，乃至從肩著頭，一一移，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk has received an entrusted item and while crossing a river, pond, flood, or in the rain, fearing his robes get wet, checks the items and thinks, "The depositor is far, the previous person does not know, I should take this for myself," and conceives a mind to steal, moving the item from the ground to the knee, from the knee to the ground, from the left shoulder to the right shoulder, or from the shoulder to the head, moving it piece by piece, then it is a Parajika offense.

彼受寄比丘隨道行，見異比丘從前而來，便問異比丘：「長老何處來？」答言：「某處來。」問：「識某比丘不？」答言：「識。」復問：「某比丘平安不？」答言：「已死、若泥洹。」
If the monk who has received the entrusted item is walking along the path and sees another monk coming, he might ask, "Elder, where do you come from?" The other replies, "From such and such place." He asks, "Do you know a certain monk?" The reply is "Yes." He then asks, "Is the monk well?" The answer is, "He has died or attained Nirvana."

此諸衣物應屬現前僧，若受寄比丘知法多詐，便作是念：「我何為與是比丘分？」默捨異比丘去。
The items in question should belong to the present Sangha. If the monk who received them is deceitful in the knowledge of the Dharma, he may think, "Why should I share with this monk?" and silently disregards the other monk and leaves.

離見聞處便說是言：「某甲比丘無常、若般涅槃，彼比丘有是衣鉢若餘雜物，現前僧應分；現前無僧，我今應受。」受已，是比丘詐心故獨受，得越比尼罪。
Away from the seeing and hearing of others, he may say, "Such and such monk is impermanent, or has passed into Nirvana. This monk had robes, bowls, and other miscellaneous items; the present Sangha should divide them. Since there is no Sangha present, I should take them now." Having received them, due to his deceitful mind taking alone, he commits a Sanghadisesa offense.

受寄比丘乘船欲渡水，有異比丘從彼岸渡來，此比丘問言：「汝從何處來？」答言：「從某處來。」又問：「識彼比丘不？」答言：「識。」復問：「某比丘平安不？」答言：「若死、若般泥洹。」
The monk who received items by entrustment boards a boat to cross water, another monk comes rowing from the other shore, and asks, "Where do you come from?" The reply is "From such and such place." He further asks, "Do you know such a monk?" The answer is "Yes." He questions again, "Is that monk well?" The response is, "He is dead or has attained Nirvana."

爾時此諸衣物應屬現前僧，是比丘知法多詐，乃至詐心羯磨，得越比尼罪。
At that time, these robes and items should belong to the present Sangha. If the monk is deceitful with much Dharma, up to carrying out deceitful transactions, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

若受寄比丘乘船渡水在於中流，有異比丘從彼來渡，中流相遇。此比丘問言：「長老從何處來？」乃至詐心羯磨，得越比尼罪。
If the monk who received entrusted items is crossing the water midstream in a boat, and encounters another monk approaching midstream, he might ask, "Elder, where do you come from?" Up to deceitful transactions, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

若受寄比丘到彼岸下船，有異比丘從彼始欲上船，乃至詐心羯磨，得越比尼罪。
If the monk who received entrusted items disembarks on the other shore, and another monk is just about to board the boat, up to deceitful transactions, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

受寄比丘上岸去，有異比丘從彼道來。問言：「長老何處來？」答言：「某處來。」乃至詐心羯磨，得越比尼罪。
The monk who received entrusted items goes ashore, and another monk comes from the path and asks, "Elder, where do you come from?" The reply is, "From such and such place." Up to deceitful transactions, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

是比丘若思惟：「當前看，多有同名者，竟知云何，須至彼處。」至彼處已復問：「彼比丘平安不？」即答言：「若死、若般泥洹。」
If the monk thinks, "Currently, there are many with the same name, how can I truly know, I must reach that place." Once there, he asks again, "Is that monk well?" The reply is, "He is dead or has attained Nirvana."

爾時衣物應屬現前僧，是比丘知法多詐，便作是念：「是衣何為與多人共分？」密喚知識比丘出界外作是言：「某甲比丘無常若般泥洹，所有衣鉢及眾雜物，應現前僧分。我今現前，我等應受。」
At that time, the robes and items should belong to the present Sangha. The monk, knowing the Dharma and being deceitful, thinks, "Why should I divide these robes with many?" He secretly calls an acquaintance of monks outside the boundary, saying, "Such and such monk is impermanent or has attained Nirvana. All garments and miscellaneous items should be divided among the present Sangha. I am now present, we should receive them."

受已，詐心羯磨故，得越比尼罪。
Upon receiving, due to deceitful maneuverings, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense.

比丘若作是念：「此衣鉢本不語我與塔與僧。」所與者已死、已般泥洹，持是物還本比丘者無罪。
If a monk thinks, "This robe and bowl were originally not spoken of to give to the stupa or the Sangha," and the recipient has already died or attained Nirvana, returning this item to the original monk incurs no fault.

是名寄分齊。若比丘盜心，觸此寄分齊物，得越比尼罪；乃至離本處，滿者，波羅夷。
This is called the boundary of entrusted allocation. If a monk with the mind to steal touches these entrusted items, he incurs a Sanghadisesa offense; and even leaving the original place, to the fullest measure, it is a Parajika offense.



雜物分齊者，如放牧人放雜種種畜生，所謂若象、若馬、若牛、若駝、若驢、若羊等。
Miscellaneous things are like herdsmen releasing various kinds of animals, such as elephants, horses, cattle, camels, donkeys, sheep, and so on.

象者，象有多種，若良善、好色、健走者。
Elephants are of many kinds, such as good, vigorous, and fast-walking ones.

若比丘盜心，取象，騎已攝鉤牽向一方，若欲向東方，象狂趣南西北方，未波羅夷；
If a monk with a stealing mind takes an elephant, rides it, pulls it with a hook towards one direction, and if he intends to go east but the elephant crazily goes south, west, or north, it is not a downfall offense.

若盜心取象欲向南方，若象狂趣西北東方，未波羅夷；西北方亦如是。
If with the stealing mind, he takes an elephant intending to go south, but the elephant crazily goes west, north, or east, it is not a downfall offense; the same applies to the northwest direction.

若欲盜象向東，象即向東者，波羅夷；南西北方亦如是。
If intending to steal an elephant to go east, and the elephant actually goes east, it is a downfall offense; the same applies to south, west, and north.

若先無定方隨處而去，象舉四足則波羅夷。
If originally with no fixed direction and goes randomly, when the elephant raises its four feet, it is a downfall offense.

馬者，馬有多種，有良善、好色、健走者，
As for horses, there are many kinds, such as good, vigorous, and fast-walking ones,

若比丘盜心欲取此馬，乘馬已欲向東方，馬狂趣南西北方，未波羅夷；
If a monk with a stealing mind wants to take a horse, rides it intending to go east, but the horse crazily goes south, west, or north, it is not a downfall offense;

如是南西北方亦如是。馬隨方去如上說。
Similarly, for the directions of south, west, and north. If the horse follows any direction as said above.

若無定方隨處而去者，馬舉四足。波羅夷。
If without a fixed direction and goes randomly, when the horse raises its four feet, it is a downfall offense.

若比丘盜良馬乘走，而馬主覺即乘馬逐，其主不作失想、比丘不作得想，未波羅夷；
If a monk steals a good horse and rides away, and the horse owner realizes and follows, if the owner doesn't think it's lost, and the monk doesn't think it's gained, it is not a downfall offense.

若馬主作失想、比丘不作得想，未波羅夷；
If the horse owner thinks it's lost, and the monk doesn't think it's gained, it is not a downfall offense.

若馬主作失想、比丘作得想，波羅夷。
If the horse owner thinks it's lost, and the monk thinks it's gained, it is a downfall offense.

若比丘盜心，若以鹽、若以草，誘他馬將去，離見聞處，波羅夷。
If a monk with a stealing mind uses either salt or grass to lure away someone else's horse to a place out of sight, it is a downfall offense.

牛者，牛有多種，有良善、軟毛、好色、健走者。
As for cattle, there are many kinds, such as good, soft-haired, vigorous, and fast-walking ones.

若比丘以盜心，持杖驅牛向東方，犯不犯如象中說。
If a monk with a stealing mind drives a cow with a stick towards the east, whether it is an offense is as explained with the elephant.

乃至若牛主覺已追逐，其主不作失想、比丘不作得想，未波羅夷；
Even if the cow owner realizes and follows, if the owner doesn't think it's lost, and the monk doesn't think it's gained, it is not a downfall offense.

若牛主作失想、比丘作得想者，波羅夷。
If the cow owner thinks it's lost, and the monk thinks it's gained, it is a downfall offense.

若盜心，以鹽、以草誘他牛將去，若長繩牽去，離見聞處，波羅夷。
If with a stealing mind, using salt, grass to lure someone else's cow, or using a long rope to pull it away, to a place out of sight, it is a downfall offense.

如牛，餘駝驢羊亦如是。
As with cattle, the same applies to other camels, donkeys, sheep.

是為雜分齊。若比丘盜心，觸此雜分齊者，得越比尼罪。
This is what is meant by miscellaneous things. If a monk with a stealing mind touches these miscellaneous things, he commits an offense.

乃至離本處，滿者，波羅夷。
Even when leaving the original place, if to a certain extent, it is a downfall offense.




幡分齊者，若佛生處、得道處、轉法輪處、阿難大會處、羅睺羅大會處、般遮于瑟大會處，是諸大會處種種莊嚴，懸繒幡蓋及眾寶鈴。
The locations where flags are displayed, such as the place of the Buddha's birth, the place of enlightenment, the place of the first teaching, the assembly place of Ānanda, the assembly place of Rāhula, the assembly place of Pāṇḍaravāsinī, and various grand assembly places, are adorned with various decorations, flags, and numerous precious bells.

若比丘盜心，取幡，解繩一頭，未波羅夷；解兩頭已，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with the intent to steal, takes a flag and unties one end of the rope, he has not yet committed a complete offense; if he unties both ends, he commits a complete offense.

若比丘盜心，詐分布諸幡，處處間取，未波羅夷；取已持去，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with the intent to steal, deceitfully distributes various flags and takes them from different places, he has not yet committed a complete offense; if he takes them away, he commits a complete offense.

若比丘盜花鬘，解一頭，未波羅夷；解兩頭竟，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk steals a garland and unties one end, he has not yet committed a complete offense; if he unties both ends completely, he commits a complete offense.

若二比丘闇處盜幡，俱不相知，各從一頭解繩收攝，共合中間，相問：「汝是誰？」怖畏捨幡而走，得偷蘭罪；此二比丘互相問時各言：「偷幡。」便共盜取，滿者，波羅夷。
If two monks steal a flag in the dark, each unaware of the other, and each untying one end of the rope, then meet in the middle and ask, "Who are you?" and in fear, they drop the flag and run, they incur a minor theft offense; but if the two monks question each other and each says, "Stealing a flag," and they jointly take it, they commit a complete offense.

若眾多色幡共一繩大重，各解一頭墮地，擔不能勝，從地曳去，雖遠，未波羅夷；舉離地時，俱波羅夷。
If many colored flags are held by one heavy rope, if each unties one end and the flags fall to the ground, dragging them along the ground, even far, they have not yet committed a complete offense; but when lifted off the ground, they both commit a complete offense.

若此比丘作是念：「此莊嚴塔物，取者大罪。我唯須一色物。」即取一色物，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk thinks, "These are sacred items for adorning the stupa, taking them is a serious offense. I only need one colored item," and takes one colored item, he commits a complete offense.

若言：「我須半色。」取半色，不滿，偷蘭罪；滿者，波羅夷。
If he says, "I need half a colored item," and takes half, he does not commit a complete offense, but incurs a minor theft offense; if complete, he commits a complete offense.

若二比丘闇處盜幡，俱不相知，各從一頭解繩收攝，共合中間，相問：「汝是誰？」怖畏捨幡而走，得偷蘭罪。
If two monks steal a flag in the dark, each unaware of the other, each untying one end of the rope, then meet in the middle and ask, "Who are you?" and in fear, they drop the flag and run, they incur a minor theft offense.

有比丘晨朝遶塔，見此幡在塔下，便盜心持去，滿者，是比丘波羅夷。
If a monk circumambulates the stupa at dawn, sees the flag under the stupa, and takes it with intent to steal, he commits a complete offense.

有人供養菩提樹，七寶莊嚴，金銀珠鑷種種幡花、金繩連綿金鎖懸鈴，博山金光以用供養。
Someone offerings the Bodhi tree, with ornate adornments of the seven treasures, gold and silver jewels hanging various flags and flowers with gold strings, continuous golden locks and hanging bells, using shining gold for offerings.

若比丘盜心，取彼諸物，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with the intent to steal, takes these items, he commits a complete offense.

又復諸外道塔亦種種繒綵供養，比丘盜心取，滿者，波羅夷。
Similarly, various external stupas adorned with various silk fabrics as offerings; if a monk, with intent to steal, takes them, he commits a complete offense.

若風吹落地，知是塔上供養具者不應取；若風吹遠處塵垢黑污，作糞掃想取者，無罪。
If the wind blows items to the ground, knowing they are offerings from the stupa, one should not take them; if the wind blows them far away and they are dirty and dusty, taking them as thought to be for cleaning is not a crime.

若天寺中有雜衣物，比丘盜心取，滿者，波羅夷。
If in a celestial temple there are mixed garments and items, and a monk, with intent to steal, takes them, he commits a complete offense.

若風吹遠處塵垢黑污，糞掃想取者，無罪。
If the wind blows them far away and they are dusty and dirty, taking them as thought to be for cleaning is not a crime.

是名幡分齊。
This is called the division of flags.

若比丘盜心，觸此幡分齊物，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，偷蘭罪；若離本處，滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with the intent to steal, touches these objects related to the division of flags, he incurs a minor offense; if he moves the objects, he incurs a minor theft offense; if he takes them away, he commits a complete offense.



相因分齊者，若長者家，有不收斂物在異處，所謂衣服、瓔珞等。
This passage discusses the possession and boundaries of items, such as clothing and jewelry, in a house of a wealthy person.

是時比丘將沙彌入長者家，時此比丘盜心，取長者衣物，內著囊中令沙彌擔去時，得越比尼罪；沙彌持去出家界時，偷蘭罪；作得想滿者，波羅夷。
At that time, a monk, with the intention of stealing, takes the elder's clothing, puts it in a bag, and makes a novice carry it away, thereby committing a minor offense; if the novice carries it out of the monastic boundary, it becomes a more serious offense; if he fully intends to steal, it becomes the most serious offense.

時主人覺，語比丘言：「長老！作何等？」答言：「長壽！我為自動手耳。」作是語時，得越比尼罪。
When the owner realizes and asks the monk, "Elder! What are you doing?" he replies, "I was just moving my hand." By saying this, he commits a minor offense.

使俗人持去亦如上說。
It is the same offense if a layperson is made to carry it away.

如因長毛羊中持物去亦如是。
The same applies if the items are carried away in long-haired sheep.

若比丘入長者家，犢子見比丘衣色，謂是其母來趣比丘，比丘應驅還。
If a monk enters a wealthy person's house and a calf, seeing the color of the monk's robe, thinks it is its mother and approaches the monk, the monk should drive it away.

若以鹽、若以草誘彼犢子，得越比尼罪；將未出界，得偷蘭罪；出界已，波羅夷。
If the monk entices the calf with salt or grass, he commits a minor offense; if he takes it out of the boundary, it becomes a more serious offense; once out of the boundary, it is the most serious offense.

若比丘食時盜心取比坐揵鎡，著自鉢中令弟子持去，得越比尼罪；弟子出界，偷蘭罪；若作得想，波羅夷。
If a monk takes, with a stealing intention, another person's eating utensil and places it in his own bowl for a disciple to carry away, he commits a minor offense; if the disciple takes it out of the boundary, it becomes more serious; if fully intended, it is the most serious offense.

若彼比丘覺已，即語長老：「作何等？」答言：「我戲弄耳。」作是語，得越比尼罪。
If the aforementioned monk realizes and says to an elder, "What are you doing?" and gets the reply, "I was just playing," this statement carries a minor offense.

若比丘共估客共行，復有估客從彼而來，中道相遇共宿一處。
If a monk travels with merchants and they meet other merchants along the way, and they all rest in one place.

比丘夜中起盜心，捉他車繫著他車、捉他男繫著他男、捉他女繫著他女、捉他小兒繫著他小兒，欲令各各相牽而去，作是方便，得越比尼罪；出住處界，得偷蘭罪；作得想，波羅夷。
In the middle of the night, a monk with stealing intention ties one cart to another, ties men to men, women to women, and children to children, attempting to make them take each other away, committing a minor offense; if they leave the residence boundary, it becomes more serious; fully intending, it is the most serious offense.

是名相因分齊物。
This is called possession of shared items.

若比丘盜心，觸此相因分齊物，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with stealing intention, touches these shared items, he commits a minor offense; if he moves them, it becomes more serious; if taken away entirely, it is the most serious offense.




杙分齊者，若佛生處、得道處、轉法輪處、阿難大會處、羅睺羅大會處、般遮于瑟大會處，是諸精舍內莊嚴校飾，處處椓杙懸雜幡蓋，種種眾寶懸於杙上。
Places like where the Buddha was born, attained enlightenment, turned the wheel of the Dharma, Ananda's assembly, Rahula's assembly, and the assembly at Kalandaka are adorned within these monasteries, with poles planted everywhere, hanging with banners and canopies, and various treasures hung on the poles.

若比丘盜心，取此杙上諸寶，以手舉寶，寶雖舉、繩未離杙，未波羅夷；離杙已，波羅夷。
If a monk with a thieving mind takes the treasures from these poles and lifts them by hand, but the rope does not separate from the pole, it is not a grave offense; but once it is off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩堅勁，舉寶時繩離杙者，波羅夷。
If the rope is strong, and when lifting the treasure the rope separates from the pole, it is a grave offense.

合杙盜，手觸時，得越比尼罪；若動彼杙者，偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
When stealing the pole, if one touches it, one commits a minor offense; if the pole is moved, it is a medium offense; if it is completely removed, it is a grave offense.

若杙上懸酥瓶、油瓶、蜜瓶、若鉢、縷丸，若比丘盜心，取此酥瓶者，以手舉時，若繩軟杙直，雖舉，未波羅夷；一切離杙，波羅夷。
If on the pole hangs a butter jar, oil jar, honey jar, bowl, or yarn ball, and a monk with a thieving mind takes a butter jar, if the rope is soft and the pole is straight, even if lifted, it is not a grave offense; but if completely off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩堅勁杙曲，雖舉，未波羅夷；一切離杙下已，滿者，波羅夷。
If the rope is strong and the pole is bent, even when lifted, it is not a grave offense; if it comes completely off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩軟杙曲，雖舉，未波羅夷；一切離杙下已，滿者，波羅夷。
If the rope is soft and the pole is bent, even when lifted, it is not a grave offense; if it comes completely off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩堅勁而杙復直，舉則波羅夷。
If the rope is strong and the pole is straight, lifting it constitutes a grave offense.

若穿瓶者，犯越比尼罪；若以器承入器者，偷蘭罪；流注斷滿者，波羅夷；流注未斷便悔畏犯重罪，還倒本器中者，得偷蘭罪。
If one pierces the jar, it is a minor offense; if one pours from one vessel into another, it is a medium offense; if the flow is uninterrupted and complete, it is a grave offense; if during the flow, fearing a grave offense, one repents and pours back into the original vessel, it is a medium offense.

油瓶蜜瓶亦如是。
The same goes for oil jars and honey jars.

若比丘欲盜鉢者，以手舉時，繩軟杙直，雖舉，未波羅夷；鉢離杙下已，波羅夷。
If a monk intends to steal a bowl and lifts it by hand with soft ropes and straight poles, it is not a grave offense; once the bowl is off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩堅勁而杙曲，雖舉，未波羅夷；離杙已，波羅夷。
If the rope is strong and the pole is bent, lifting is not a grave offense; once off the pole, it is a grave offense.

繩軟杙曲者，舉持，未波羅夷；離杙下已，波羅夷。
If the rope is soft and the pole is bent, lifting is not a grave offense; once off the pole, it is a grave offense.

若繩堅勁杙直，舉則波羅夷。
If the rope is strong and the pole is straight, lifting results in a grave offense.

若盜縷丸時，縷丸繩杙如上說。
When stealing a yarn ball, the conditions of the yarn ball rope and pole are as mentioned above.

又復盜丸時若作是念：「我須少許縷。」就杙上纏取縷，不斷者，未波羅夷；若縷斷滿者，波羅夷。
When stealing the yarn ball, if one thinks, "I only need a little thread," and takes it without breaking it off, it is not a grave offense; if the thread is completely broken off, it is a grave offense.

此比丘纏縷時，縷未斷尋悔畏犯重罪，還著本處者，偷蘭罪。
If the monk repents without breaking the thread off, out of fear of committing a grave offense, and returns it to its place, it is a medium offense.

是名杙分齊。
This is what is called the division of poles and treasures.

若比丘盜心，觸此杙分齊物者，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk with a thieving heart touches these pole and treasure items, he commits a minor offense; if he moves them, it is a medium offense; if completely removed, it is a grave offense.



園分齊者，時有長者，其家大富，有一比丘名俱盧，常入出其家。
In a certain garden, there was once an elder who was very wealthy, and a monk named Gulou often visited his home.

主人兄弟父母在時共活，父母終沒家內不和，弟欲分財其兄不肯欲共義居。
When the parents of the master's siblings passed away, there was disharmony in the house. The younger brother wanted to divide the inheritance, but the elder brother did not want to and suggested living together harmoniously.

弟求分不已，兄不免情即便許之，相與義言：「誰能分財？」
The younger brother persistently requested the division, and the elder brother, unable to refuse, agreed, discussing together: "Who can divide the inheritance?"

答言：「阿闍梨俱盧是，父母在時所重供養，家中有無悉知。」皆言：「大善。」
They answered, "It should be the monk Gulou, whom our parents respected and supported during their lifetime, knowing everything about the household." Everyone agreed, "Very well."

時弟諂曲即詣俱盧禮拜問訊，問訊已作是言：「阿闍梨是我父母所尊兄弟所敬，家中有無皆悉知之。
The younger brother, full of flattery, went to Gulou, paid respects, and after inquiring about his health, said, "Master, you were respected by my parents and esteemed by my brother; you know all about our household affairs.

父母平存兄弟共居，今父母終沒家內不和，欲共分財故來上啟。
When our parents were alive, my brother and I lived together amicably, but now that they have passed away and there is discord, we wish to divide the inheritance and have come to inform you.

我分居之後當供養阿闍梨，供養之餘當以自活。願阿闍梨分財之日，好者見與。」
After dividing and living separately, I will continue to support you, and from the leftover, I will sustain myself. I hope that when you divide the property, you will give me a favorable share."

比丘受彼語者，犯越比尼罪；若留好物時，偷蘭罪；分物決已，波羅夷。
If a monk accepts such a request, it is a minor disciplinary offense; if he keeps better property, it is a theft-related offense; once the division is determined, it is a serious offense.

欲分物時，比丘問言：「先分何等？」主人言：「先分二足、四足。」
When intending to divide the property, the monk asked, "What should be divided first?" The owner replied, "First divide two-legged and four-legged creatures."

比丘便為先分二足，奴婢之中老病難使不可信者，分作一分；
The monk first divided the two-legged creatures, among the servants, those who were old, sick, difficult to employ, and unreliable, were placed in one group.

年少無病易使可信者，作一分。
Those who were young, healthy, easy to employ, and reliable were placed in another group.

分四足時，群牛之中羸老無力，麁弊難用不產少乳，有產難𤛓，以為一分；
When dividing the four-legged creatures, among the cattle, those thin, old, weak, rough, unsuitable, nonproductive, or producing little milk were placed in one group.

少齒肥壯調利易用，種產多乳良善易𤛓，復作一分。
Those who were young, fat, strong, healthy, and productive, producing much milk were placed in another group.

若分房舍，朽故弊者持作一分，若新好者復作一分，樓閣店肆亦復如是。
In dividing houses, those that were decayed and poor were placed in one group, and those that were new and good in another, similarly with pavilions and shops.

乃至分田，薄塉多穢持作一分，肥好良者復作一分；
Even when dividing fields, those that were barren and impure were placed in one group, and those that were fertile and good in another.

園中不如少花果者持作一分，園林花果茂盛勝者以為一分。
In gardens, those with few flowers and fruits were placed in one group, and those that were lush and abundant were placed in another.

復欲分穀米金銀錢財。
They also wanted to divide grain, rice, gold, silver, and wealth.

爾時彼兄語比丘言：「阿闍梨是我父母所敬兄弟所重，云何分財乃如是耶？」
At that time, the elder brother told the monk, "Master, you were respected by our parents and esteemed by the brothers, how can the division of property be like this?"

阿闍梨且還，思惟佛語：「若比丘作如是心分他財者，主雖不聽，得越比尼罪。」
The monk returned, reflecting on the Buddha’s words, "If a monk thinks of dividing others’ property against their wishes, it is a minor disciplinary offense."

俱盧還已，彼兄弟尋更論議：「復應有誰是父母所重者？
After Gulou returned, the brothers started discussing again: "Who else would be someone respected by our parents?

耆舊大德知家有無，屈令分財；若不速分，恐王聞者或能稅奪。」
An elder with great virtue who knows the household’s assets and liabilities could be asked to divide the property; if not divided quickly, the king might hear and seize it."

尋思大德無過俱盧，宜當更請令分此財。
They thought there was no one better than Gulou, and decided to ask him again to divide the property.

兄弟義合，即詣俱盧禮拜問訊，在一面坐白俱盧言：「阿闍梨父母所重，家中有無阿闍梨所知。
The brothers agreed, went to Gulou, paid respects, inquired about his welfare, and one of them said: "Master, you were respected by our parents and know everything about the household.

今當為我分此財物。」彼時俱盧恨其前時不受分處，告言：「汝兄弟薄義多疑少信，誰當堪忍為汝分財。」
Now, please divide this property for us." At that time, Gulou, regretting not accepting before, said, "You brothers have weak principles, are suspicious and mistrustful, who could endure and divide the property for you?"

彼兄弟言：「前實倉卒，有愧阿闍梨。阿闍梨是由來家中多少是所諳，
The brothers said, "Previously, we were indeed hasty, and we are ashamed before you. You have always been familiar with the household's assets,

悉今願見為分此錢財，王脫知者或能稅奪，是故欲速分之。」
Now we sincerely wish you would divide the property for us, as if the king finds out, he might seize it; therefore, we want it divided quickly."

比丘答言：「汝等必欲令我分耶？」答言：「實爾。阿闍梨！」
The monk replied, "Are you certain that you want me to divide it?" They answered, "Indeed, Master!"

彼比丘言：「若必爾者當作言要，分物之後得分便取，無餘言者當為汝分。」
The monk said, "If you insist, you must promise that once the items are divided, you will immediately take possession without further words, then I will divide them for you."

彼各答言：「隨教，不敢復違。」
Each of them promised, "We will follow your guidance and not defy it."

是比丘受彼請已應作等分，彼分田時牽繩量地，若偏心量地覺一麥者，是比丘得波羅夷。
For properly dividing, the monk who received the request should make equal distributions. When dividing the fields, if he measured the land with bias towards even a single grain, it would be a severe offense.

以地無價故，是名園分齊。
Because land has no set value, this is known as dividing the garden properly.

若比丘盜心，觸此園分齊物，得越比尼罪；乃至滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk, with thieving intent, touches these appropriately divided garden items, it results in a minor disciplinary offense; if exceeding the limit, it is a serious offense.



賊分齊者，有比丘在道行為賊所劫，賊少比丘多。  
As for bandit partitions, there were monks on the road who were robbed by bandits, with fewer bandits and more monks.

時諸比丘自相謂言：「今此賊少、我等人多，當共合力還取本物。」  
At that time, the monks said to each other, "Now there are few bandits, and we are many; we should unite and take back our belongings."

即便相與共捉塼石追逐彼賊，並遙罵言：「弊惡罪賊，我等自可剃除鬚髮，汝復謂我剃去手脚？」  
They then joined forces, picking up bricks and stones to chase the bandits, cursing them from afar, "You heinous bandits! We can shave our own heads, do you think you'll shave our limbs too?"

時賊恐怖便放衣鉢各自散走。  
The bandits, in fear, dropped the monks' robes and bowls and fled in all directions.

彼比丘若未作失想者，還取本物，無罪；已作失想而還取者，便為賊復劫賊，滿者，波羅夷。  
If those monks had not given up on their items yet, they could retrieve them without guilt; but if they had given them up and then retrieved them, it was as if a bandit stole from another bandit, resulting in a grave offense.

有比丘在道行為賊所劫，諸比丘失衣鉢已入林中藏。  
Monks on the road were robbed, and some monks lost their robes and bowls and hid in the forest.

時賊思惟我伴黨多而此物少，寧可相與，更求少物。  
The bandits thought that while they were many, their loot was little, so it was better to seek more elsewhere.

即藏衣鉢覆著一處，而復於道更劫餘人。  
Thus they hid the robes and bowls in one place and went to rob others on the road again.

爾時比丘見彼藏物，伺賊去後便取衣鉢。  
At that time, the monks, spotting their hidden items, waited for the bandits to leave and then retrieved their robes and bowls.

是比丘若先不作失想，還取本物者，無罪；若作失想，不應取，若取者便為賊復劫賊，滿者，波羅夷。  
If those monks had not given up yet and retrieved their items, there was no offense; but if they had given up and still took them, it was as if a bandit stole from another bandit, which was a grave offense.

又比丘在道行為賊所劫，時賊劫諸比丘衣鉢順道而去。  
Again, monks on the road were robbed, with the bandits taking the monks' robes and bowls and leaving.

時諸比丘隨後遙望，看彼群賊所至何處，追之不止漸近聚落，賊便分物。  
The monks followed them from afar to see where the bandit group would go, and chased them until near a settlement where the bandits began to divide the spoils.

比丘便語賊言：「長壽！我出家人仰他活命，汝等可乞我衣鉢。汝復何用此衣鉢為？」  
The monks said to the bandits, "Good sir! As monks, we rely on others to live, can you beg for my robe and bowl? What use do you have for them?"

若比丘如是得者，無罪。  
If the monks obtained the items in this way, there was no offense.

若賊罵言：「弊惡沙門，我已乞汝命。何敢復來欲得衣鉢？」  
If the bandits cursed, saying, "You vile monks, I have spared your life. How dare you come back and ask for your robes and bowls?"

比丘念言：「是賊已近聚落必不害我，當恐怖之。」  
The monk thought, "These bandits are near the settlement and will not harm me, I should frighten them."

即語賊言：「汝等謂我無所恃耶？我當白王及諸大臣知汝為賊。」  
They told the bandits, "Do you think I have no patrons? I will inform the king and ministers that you are bandits."

若恐怖得者，無罪。  
If they retrieved the items through intimidation, there was no offense.

賊復瞋言：「終不與汝，欲去任意。」  
The bandits angrily said, "We will never give it to you, do as you please."

若比丘告聚落主，捉得諸賊若縛、若殺，不應告。  
If monks inform the village chief, who then captures or kills the bandits, they should not do this.

若語聚落主，方便慰喻得衣鉢者，無罪。  
If they inform the chief and tactfully persuade him to retrieve the robes and bowls, there is no offense.

有比丘多有衣鉢、大畜弟子，彼諸弟子不修戒行，作是念言：「可往和上、阿闍梨房中盜諸衣鉢。」  
There were monks with many robes and bowls and a large number of disciples, whose disciples did not practice discipline and thought, "Let's go to the teacher's room and steal the robes and bowls."

自己衣鉢亦師房中，便共作要：「汝得衣物者與我共分，若我得者亦共汝分。」  
Their own robes and bowls were also in the teacher's room, so they made an agreement: "If you get any clothes, share them with me, and if I get any, I will share with you."

便入房中，就衣架上，捉和上、阿闍梨衣徙就己衣，不離本架者，犯偷蘭罪；若舉師衣離架，著己衣上者，波羅夷。  
They entered the room, and from the clothes rack, if they took the teacher's robes and placed them on their own without removing them from the rack, this was a minor offense; if they removed them from the rack and put them on their own clothes, it was a serious offense.

若師衣帶衣角若綖縷未離衣架者，未波羅夷；一切離已，波羅夷。  
If the teacher's robe, its corner or thread, had not left the clothes rack, it was not a serious offense; once fully separated, it was a serious offense.

彼和上、阿闍梨疑是弟子或能偷我衣鉢，便自藏衣鉢更著餘處。  
The teacher suspected a disciple might steal their robes and bowls, so they hid them elsewhere.

其弟子便入闇中誤偷自己衣鉢，出外不分故，是中半衣邊滿者，波羅夷。  
The disciple entered the dark and mistakenly stole their own robes and bowls while outside, so having a full part of them was a serious offense.

有一比丘摩訶羅出家，不善戒行，有比丘語言：「長老共作賊來。」  
There was a monk, Mahara, who was ordained but did not follow the precepts well, and another monk said, "Elder, let's become bandits together."

摩訶羅言：「我本在家初不作賊，我今出家云何作賊？」  
Mahara said, "I was never a bandit at home, how can I become one now after ordaining?"

彼比丘言：「汝不欲作賊者，汝但守門，當與汝分」。  
The monk said, "If you don't want to be a bandit, just guard the entrance, and we will share with you."

摩訶羅念言：「我不作賊與我等分，何以不去」？答言：「可爾。」  
Mahara thought, "If I don't need to be a bandit and will still get a share, why not?" and agreed.

即俱共去，使摩訶羅守門。  
So they went together, with Mahara guarding the door.

彼比丘便入，盜心觸物時，二俱得越比尼罪；若動彼物時，二俱得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，二俱得波羅夷。  
When the monk entered with intent to steal and touched the items, both received a minor offense; if they moved the items, both received a serious offense; if fully removed from their place, both committed a grave offense.

若有客比丘來，或在食堂、或在禪房止宿，晨朝便去，或忘衣鉢及諸物等。  
If a guest monk arrived, stayed overnight in the dining hall or meditation room, and left in the morning, they might forget their robes and bowls or other items.

時舊比丘摩摩諦安行房舍，欲知客比丘去未，便見衣鉢，即生盜心，取已徙著異處覆藏，得波羅夷。  
When a resident monk, cautious and aware, checked whether the guest monk had left, they saw the robes and bowls, conceived a theft intention, moved and hid them elsewhere, committing a grave offense.

更異比丘來，復見是衣物，亦生盜心，即取復徙異處覆藏，亦波羅夷。  
When another monk came and saw the items, also conceived a theft intention, took and moved them elsewhere, also committed a grave offense.

復第三人復生盜心，徙覆藏餘處，亦波羅夷。  
A third person followed the same pattern, also committing a grave offense.

隨人多少起盜心轉徙，一切悉得波羅夷。  
Everyone who harbored a theft intention and moved the items committed a grave offense.

彼衣物主遠去已，憶念還來，取得者無罪。  
If the owner of the items went far and later remembered and retrieved them, there was no offense.

有比丘忘衣鉢，餘比丘見即生盜心，不自手取，便語一摩訶羅比丘令取。  
When a monk forgot their robes and bowls, and another monk saw them and conceived a theft intention, if they didn't take it themselves but told a Mahara monk to take it.

摩訶羅比丘謂為是其衣鉢，便為取之。  
The Mahara monk, thinking it was theirs, took it.

觸時，是盜心比丘得越比尼罪；動時，得偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，得波羅夷。  
When touched, the stealing-intending monk committed a minor offense; when moved, it was a serious offense; when fully removed from their place, it was a grave offense.

摩訶羅不作盜心故，三時都無罪。  
Mahara, without the intent to steal, was not guilty at any stage.

若先語摩訶羅：「取此衣鉢當共分之。」摩訶羅盜心，觸時，俱越比尼罪；動時，俱偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，俱波羅夷。  
If they told Mahara first, "Take this robe and bowl, and we'll share," and Mahara intended to steal, both committed a minor offense when touched; a serious offense when moved; and a grave offense if fully removed.

若摩訶羅看已作是念：「何為與彼分？我當獨取。」即便持去，得波羅夷罪；彼比丘，得偷蘭罪。  
If Mahara thought, "Why share with him? I will take it myself." and took it away, they committed a grave offense; the initiating monk committed a serious offense.

若比丘作摩摩帝塔無物，眾僧有物，便作是念：「天人所以供養眾僧者，皆蒙佛恩，供養佛者便為供養眾僧。」即持僧物修治塔者，此摩摩帝得波羅夷。  
If a monk, with no personal possessions but with communal belongings, thought, "Heavenly beings offer to the Sangha by the Buddha's grace, offering to Buddha is like offering to the Sangha," and used Sangha items to build a stupa, they committed a grave offense.

若塔有物、眾僧無物，便作是念：「供養僧者佛亦在其中。」便持塔物供養眾僧，摩摩帝用者，得波羅夷。  
If the stupa had offerings and the Sangha had none, thinking, "Giving to the Sangha includes giving to the Buddha," using stupa materials for Sangha offerings, the initiator committed a grave offense.

若塔無物、僧有物者，得如法貸用，但分明疏記言：「某時貸用，某時得當還。」  
If the stupa had no offerings, but the Sangha did, legal borrowing was permitted, provided a clear note stated: "Borrowed at this time, due to return at that time."

若僧無物、塔有物者，得如法貸用亦如是。  
If the Sangha lacked items but the stupa had them, borrowing was similarly managed legally.

彼知事人若交代時，應僧中讀疏分明付授，若不讀疏，得越比尼罪。  
A responsible person should read the note aloud during handover within the Sangha, clarifying and passing on responsibilities; failure to do so constitutes a minor offense.

是名貸用。有二比丘共財應分，一比丘盜心，獨取除自分他分，滿者，波羅夷；若同意取者，無罪。  
This is termed as borrowing. If two monks are to divide shared assets and one, with the intention to steal, takes more than their share, it is a grave offense; if both agree to take, there is no offense.

若作是念：「我今用，後當還償。」無罪。  
If they think, "I will use it now and repay it later," there is no offense.

有二教化比丘，共作制限言：「長老！從今已後若我與汝得物，當二人共分。」  
There were two teaching monks who agreed by saying, "Elder, from now on, if we acquire anything, we will share it."

後時一人得好衣段，便作是念：「若後更得，不必及是。」  
Later on, one obtained a fine robe piece and thought, "If we get more later, it may not be as good as this."

便語伴言：「從今日始各任相錄，若汝得者汝自取，若我得者我自取。」  
Then he said to his companion, "From today onwards, let us each manage our accounts independently; if you get something, take it yourself, and if I get something, I'll take it myself."

先所得物違制故，是中半滿者，波羅夷。  
Taking the previously agreed item caused a breach in the agreement, constituting a grave offense if the amount was significant.

若此比丘受施呪願已，語施主言：「且置汝邊，我後當取。」  
If this monk, having already accepted the offering's blessing, tells the donor, "Keep it aside for me, and I'll take it later."

便還語伴言：「長老！自今日始各任相錄，若汝得者汝自取，若我得者我自取。」  
Then told his companion, "Elder, from today onwards, let us each take care of our portions independently; if you get something, take it for yourself, and if I do, I'll take it for me."

作是語時，得偷蘭罪。  
When expressing this, it constituted a serious offense.

若此比丘聞彼欲施衣，便預語伴言：「長老！自今日始各任相錄，若汝得者汝自取，若我得者我自取。」  
If this monk, upon hearing someone wants to donate a robe, preemptively tells his companion, "Elder, from now onwards, let's manage our portions independently; if you receive something, take it for yourself, and if I do, I'll take it for myself."

作是語時，得越比尼罪。  
Expressing this intention constitutes a minor offense.

有二糞掃衣，比丘共要：「從今日始，若得糞掃衣當共分。」  
There were two monks who agreed regarding tattered robes: "From today, if we obtain tattered robes, we will share them."

時一比丘得好糞掃衣，便作是念：「是衣甚好，設後更得不必及是。」  
Then one monk obtained a good tattered robe and thought, "This robe is very good, subsequent ones may not compare."

便語伴言：「長老！自今日始各任相錄，若汝得者汝自取，若我得者我自取。」  
He then said to his companion, "Elder, let's from today each manage our portions independently; if you get something, take it, and if I do, I'll claim mine."

是比丘違本要故，是中半滿者，波羅夷。  
This monk, breaking the original agreement, committed a grave offense if the division was significant.

若此比丘得好糞掃衣不取，即以草、若塼石覆之，便還解要如上說，是比丘得偷蘭罪。  
If this monk ignored the good tattered robe, covered it with grass or stones, then canceled the agreement as previously stated, they committed a serious offense.

若此比丘見好糞掃衣已，不取不覆，便還解要如上說，是比丘得越比尼罪。  
If this monk saw a good tattered robe but neither took nor covered it, and then canceled the agreement as previously stated, they committed a minor offense.

若比丘知僧物，有應與、有不應與。云何應與？若損者、若益者，應與。  
If a monk knows about communal items, there are situations where giving is appropriate or inappropriate. What is appropriate giving? If it's either a loss or a benefit circumstance, giving is proper.

云何損者？有賊來詣寺索種種飲食，若不與者或能燒劫寺內，雖不應與，畏作損事故，隨多少與。  
What is a loss situation? When bandits come to the monastery asking for food and drink, though not proper to give, out of fear of damaging the monastery, they may be given in limited amounts.

云何益者？若治眾僧房舍，若泥工、木工、畫工，及料理眾僧物事者，應與前食後食，及塗身油、非時漿等，若王及諸大勢力者，應與飲食，是名益者應與。  
What is a benefit situation? When repairing the Sangha's quarters, engaging in masonry, carpentry, painting, or managing Sangha affairs, it's appropriate to provide meals, body oil, and miscellaneous refreshments to such workers, or to kings and powerful individuals; this constitutes a benefit situation requiring proper giving.

有比丘失衣鉢物，若未作捨想，後知處，應從彼索，索者不犯。  
If a monk loses their robes and bowls but hasn't given up on retrieving them, knowing their location, it is appropriate to ask for them back; doing so is not an offense.

若已作捨想，後雖知處，不應從索，索者得，越比尼罪。  
If they have relinquished ownership, even knowing the location later, it is inappropriate to ask for them back; doing so incurs a minor offense.

若先生心言：「後若知處者當從索取。」如是索取者，無罪。  
If previously a monk thought, "If I discover where it is, I will retrieve it," retrieving it incurs no offense.

有二比丘作制限，當共受經、當共誦經，後不受不誦者，得越比尼罪。  
If two monks agree to receive and recite the scriptures together but fail to partake or recite, they incur a minor offense.

是名賊分齊物。若比丘盜心，觸此賊分齊物，得越比尼罪；若動彼物，得偷蘭罪；若離本處滿者，波羅夷。  
This is called "bandit-partitioned items." If a monk, with the intent to steal, touches these items, they incur a minor offense; if they move them, a serious offense; if fully removed, a grave offense.



稅分齊者，有比丘與估客共道行，比丘有大徒眾，時估客便語一比丘言：「汝師大德至關稅處，誰敢檢校？汝為我持此物，寄著汝師衣囊中過此稅處。」

In a group of monks traveling with a trader, when they reached a tax point, the trader said to one of the monks, "Your master is virtuous, who would dare inspect him at the tax point? Please carry this item for me in your master's bag and pass through the tax point."

是弟子即然許，持其所寄物著師囊中，是弟子得越比尼罪，師不知無罪；若到稅處，弟子得偷蘭罪，師不犯；若過稅處已，弟子得波羅夷，師不犯。

The disciple agreed, and placed the item in the master's bag. The disciple committed a minor offense, but the master was unaware and thus guiltless. If they reached the tax point, the disciple incurred a medium offense, but the master was unaffected. If they passed the tax point, the disciple committed a major offense, and the master remained guiltless.

若估客語彼師言：「阿闍梨福德之人，徒眾共行誰當檢校？唯願為我持此少物，寄著阿闍梨弟子囊中過稅處。」

If the trader said to the master, "Venerable master, with your virtuous disciples walking together, who would inspect you? Please carry this small item for me in your disciple's bag through the tax point."

彼師即便然可，取著弟子囊中時，得越比尼罪，弟子不知無罪；若至稅處，師得偷蘭罪，弟子無罪；若過稅處，師得波羅夷，弟子無罪。

The master consented and placed it in the disciple's bag, committing a minor offense, while the disciple was unaware and thus guiltless. If they reached the tax point, the master incurred a medium offense, but the disciple was unaffected. If they passed the tax point, the master committed a major offense, and the disciple remained guiltless.

若此俱語、俱然許者，俱得越比尼罪；若至稅處，俱得偷蘭罪；若過稅處，俱得波羅夷。

If both were approached, and both agreed, they would both incur a minor offense; if they reached the tax point, both would incur a medium offense; and if they passed the tax point, both would incur a major offense.

若比丘與估客共道行，至聚落邊比丘洗手，估客問言：「長老欲作何等？」

When a monk traveled with a trader and at the village edge, the monk washed his hands, the trader asked, "Elder, what do you intend to do?"

答言：「我欲乞食去。」估客言：「阿闍梨莫乞食，我當與食。」便與比丘種種美食。

He replied, "I wish to go collect alms." The trader said, "Master, do not seek alms, I shall provide food." And he gave the monk all sorts of delicious food.

食已語比丘言：「阿闍梨為我持少物過此稅處。」

After eating, he said to the monk, "Master, please carry this small item for me past this tax point."

比丘言：「世尊制戒，不聽我持應稅物過關邏處。」

The monk replied, "The Buddha made rules forbidding me to carry taxable items past checkpoints."

估客念言：「官稅亦失，與比丘亦失。二俱失者，與比丘可得福德。」

The trader thought, "The tax is lost, and the relationship with the monk is lost. Losing both would mean a gain in virtue with the monk."

便語諸比丘：「可次第住，我欲布施。」

He then said to the monks, "Please line up, I wish to make offerings."

估客即便次第布施，各滿鉢寶物。既布施已，便先出關外住待諸比丘。

The trader then, one by one, offered each monk a bowl full of precious items. After the offerings, he went outside the checkpoint to wait for the monks.

諸比丘尋後到，是估客便禮諸比丘足，白言：「諸尊見識不？」

The monks soon followed, and the trader paid respect at their feet, saying, "Do the venerable ones perceive?"

比丘答言：「識知我向者布施不？」

The monk replied, "Did I observe that offering?"

答言：「知。」「若知者，我何以布施？」答言：「汝欲作福。」

Replied, "Yes." "If so perceived, why did I make offerings?" "To accrue merit."

估客言：「實爾！但我妻子當須衣食、負債當償，願見還向物。」

The trader said, "Indeed! But my wife and children need clothes and food, and debts must be repaid. I wish to retrieve the items offered."

比丘應語言：「弊惡人！汝敢欺我，前言作福而今還索。」

The monk responded, "Wicked person! You dare deceive me, speaking of merit but now asking for what was given?"

作是語已彼猶故索，比丘還者，不犯。

After saying this, he still requested the return, but if the monk returned them, he committed no offense.

若本知不實施，比丘為受過稅處，還者，波羅夷。

If originally the monk knew the offering was insincere, accepted to pass the tax point, and returned, it was a major offense.

若比丘與估客共行，乃至言：「佛不聽受寄應稅物持過關。」估客語比丘言：「不令比丘持此物出關，且為我守，我欲暫見守關者，須臾便還。」

If a monk traveling with a trader said, "The Buddha doesn't permit receiving and carrying taxable items past checkpoints," and the trader said to the monk, "Do not hold them past the checkpoint, just guard them for me while I briefly confer with the checkpoint officer."

比丘受寄，估客逕出關外住待比丘。

The monk agreed to guard them, and the trader immediately left, waiting outside for the monk.

比丘住久，此物無所付，便持過關。

The monk waited long, with no one to entrust the items to, and then carried them past the checkpoint.

過關者，波羅夷。

Crossing the checkpoint is a major offense.

若比丘與估客共道行，乃至佛不聽比丘受寄應稅物持過關，估客言：「我不令比丘持此物過關，但為我守。我欲暫見守關者，須臾便還。」

If a monk traveling with a trader said, "The Buddha doesn't permit monks to receive and carry taxable items past checkpoints," and the trader said, "I won't make the monk take the items past the checkpoint, just guard them for me. I want to see the officer briefly, I'll be right back."

比丘便為守，語言：「汝若不來，我捨汝物去。」

The monk agreed to guard them, stating, "If you don't return, I'll abandon your items."

估客復作是念：「比丘雖作是言，終不捨我物去。」

The trader thought further, "Even though the monk says this, he'll never abandon my items."

便出關外住待比丘。

Then he went outside the checkpoint, waiting for the monk.

比丘住久而彼不還，便捨物過關而去。

After waiting long without the trader returning, the monk abandoned the items and went past the checkpoint.

估客語比丘言：「我物在何處？」

The trader asked the monk, "Where are my items?"

比丘瞋言：「汝敢戲弄我耶？我向不言：『汝須臾不還，當捨汝物去耶？』汝物故在本處，自可還取。」

The monk angrily replied, "Do you dare mock me? Did I not say, 'If you do not return shortly, I will abandon your items?' They are at the original place, you may retrieve them yourself."

比丘如是者，不犯。

In doing so, the monk commits no offense.

比丘與估客共為伴行，乃至佛不聽比丘受寄應稅物持過關。

If a monk and trader travel together, and the Buddha doesn't permit monks to accept and carry taxable items past checkpoints.

估客語比丘言：「我不令比丘持物過關，但為我守。我欲暫見守關者，須臾便還。」

The trader said to the monk, "I won't make you carry items past the checkpoint, just guard them for me. I just want to see the officer briefly, I'll return shortly."

比丘為守，即語言：「汝若不還，我持汝物寄著守關人邊。」

The monk agreed to guard them, and said, "If you don't return, I'll give your items to the checkpoint officer."

估客念言：「比丘雖作是語，何有當持我物寄守關人邊？」

The trader thought, "Even though the monk says this, he wouldn't actually give my items to the checkpoint officer."

便出關外住待比丘。

Then he went outside the checkpoint, waiting for the monk.

比丘住久而彼不還，即持其物寄守關人，語言：「有如是狀類如是名字估客來者，汝便取其稅直，餘者還之。」

The monk, after waiting long without the trader returning, gave the items to the checkpoint officer, saying, "If a trader of such description and name comes, collect the tax and return the rest."

比丘出關，估客問言：「我物在何處？」

The monk exited the checkpoint, the trader asked, "Where are my items?"

比丘瞋言：「汝敢戲弄我耶？我向不言：『汝須臾不還，我持汝物寄守關人邊耶？』汝物今在守關人邊，自可往取。」

The monk angrily replied, "You dare mock me? Did I not say, 'If you don't return soon, I'll leave your items with the checkpoint officer?' Your items are now with the checkpoint officer, retrieve them yourself."

比丘如是者，不犯。

In doing so, the monk commits no offense.




大道邊，有比丘在道邊經行，

The monks' lodging is near the roadside, and a monk is walking by the road.

估客語比丘言：「我有應稅物，願長老為我持入城。」

A merchant said to the monk, "I have taxable goods, and I wish you, Elder, to carry them into the city for me."

比丘答言：「世尊不聽我持應稅物過彼稅處，

The monk replied, "The World-Honored One does not permit me to carry taxable goods through the tax point.

然我今當教汝方便，汝便從我穿牆間去、

However, I will now teach you a way, you can pass through the gaps in the walls with me.

若籬間去、若水瀆中去，

Or go through the fences, or through the water channels.

又可寄著已稅者車上、

Or you can place it on a taxed person's cart.

又可寄著王家器中、

Or place it among the royal family's belongings.

又可寄著婢水瓶中、

Or place it inside a maid's water bottle.

又可寄著羺羊毛中去。」

Or place it among goat wool."

如是指授令入者，得越比尼罪。

By instructing in this manner and allowing entry, one incurs a minor offense.

在內指授，出外亦如是。

If instructed within, it is the same when going out.

若比丘知物應稅，而不知過稅物，得波羅夷罪。

If a monk knows goods are taxable but does not know about the passage of the goods, he incurs a serious offense.

過此稅物，滿者，波羅夷。

Passing taxable goods in full incurs a serious offense.

比丘知，過稅物，得波羅夷。

If the monk knows and passes taxable goods, he incurs a serious offense.

而不知是物應稅，過此物，滿者，波羅夷。

If he does not know the goods are taxable and passes them in fullness, he incurs a serious offense.

比丘知物應稅，亦知過稅物，得波羅夷。

If a monk knows the goods are taxable and also knows they pass, he incurs a serious offense.

過此物滿者，波羅夷。

If the goods are passed in full, a serious offense is incurred.

比丘不知應稅物，亦不知過稅物得波羅夷，而過者，不犯。

If a monk does not know the goods are taxable and also doesn't know of the passage, there is no offense.

何等物不應稅？何等物應稅？

Which goods are not taxable? Which goods are taxable?

世尊弟子比丘、比丘尼、一切外道出家人物，是名不應稅。

Disciples of the World-Honored One, monks, nuns, and all non-Buddhist ascetic persons are not taxable.

若賣買者應輸稅，是名稅分齊。

If goods are for sale and purchase, they should be taxed, this is known as the tax boundary.

若比丘盜心，觸此稅分齊物，得越比尼罪；

If a monk with thieving intentions contacts these tax-bound goods, he incurs a minor offense.

乃至滿者，波羅夷。

If in full measure, a serious offense is incurred.



若一比丘盜心，觸時藥，得越比尼罪；動彼物，得偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk with intent to steal handles a timely medicine, he commits a minor offense; moving the object, he commits an intermediate theft offense; fully removing it from its original place, he commits a serious offense.

若二、若三乃至眾多比丘，盜心觸時藥，得越比尼罪；乃至滿者，波羅夷。
If two, three, or many monks with intent to steal handle a timely medicine, they commit a minor offense; fully removing it, they commit a serious offense.

若比丘遣一比丘盜心觸時藥，得越比尼罪；乃至滿者，波羅夷。
If a monk sends another monk to handle a timely medicine with intent to steal, he commits a minor offense; fully removing it, he commits a serious offense.

若遣二、遣三乃至遣眾多比丘，盜心觸時藥，得越比尼罪；乃至滿者，波羅夷。
If he sends two, three, or many monks to handle a timely medicine with intent to steal, he commits a minor offense; fully removing it, he commits a serious offense.

若受遣比丘復遣一比丘，如是第二、第三乃至眾多比丘，盜心觸時藥，得越比尼罪；動時，得偷蘭罪；離本處滿者，波羅夷。
If a dispatched monk further sends another monk, doing so for the second, third, or many monks with intent to steal, handling the medicine results in a minor offense; moving it results in an intermediate theft offense; fully removing it results in a serious offense.

如是夜分、七日、終身，乃至淨不淨亦如是。
This applies for a part of the night, seven days, a lifetime, up to the distinction between pure and impure.




具足不與取，滿者，波羅夷。

A monk who possesses five factors and takes what is not given is guilty, achieving a Parajika offense.

何等為五？

What are the five?

所謂滿足、有主、知有主、生盜心、離本處。

They are: fulfillment, having an owner, knowing there is an owner, forming a mind to steal, and being away from its original place.

復有五法具足不與取，滿者，波羅夷。

Again, there are five factors for taking what is not given, and when fulfilled, one is guilty of a Parajika offense.

何等五？

What are the five?

於彼物不與想、非己想、有主想、不同意想、不暫用想。

They are: thinking it is not given, thinking it is not theirs, thinking it has an owner, thinking there is no consent, and thinking it is not for temporary use.

有五法具足不犯波羅夷。

There are five factors whereby one does not commit a Parajika offense.

何等五？

What are the five?

與想、自己想、無主想、同意想、暫用想，是名五比丘不與取非波羅夷。

They are: thinking it is given, thinking it is their own, thinking it is ownerless, thinking there is consent, and thinking it is for temporary use—these are the five factors for a monk to take without committing Parajika.

若比丘不與取，至東方南西北方虛空所住處，皆波羅夷。

If a monk takes what is not given and reaches any place in the cardinal directions or the sky, it is considered a Parajika offense.

若比丘不與取、若遣奴、若作人、若知識、若試作、若未曾作而作、若無知無羞淨想，皆犯。

If a monk takes what is not given, employs servants, gets involved, knows but ignores, tries for wrongdoing, acts without precedent, or lacks knowledge and shame, they are guilty.

不犯者，若狂、心亂，無罪。

They are not guilty in cases of madness or mental disturbance.

是故說，若比丘於聚落空地不與取，隨盜物王、或捉、或殺、或縛、或驅出，言：「咄男子！汝賊耶汝癡耶？」

Therefore, it is said, if a monk takes what is not given in a community area and the king of thieves arrests, kills, binds, or expels him, saying: "Hey man! Are you a thief or a fool?"

比丘如是不與取者，波羅夷，不應共住。

Monks who take what is not given in this way are guilty of Parajika and should not dwell together.



世尊於王舍城，成佛六年冬分第二半月十日，

The World-Honored One, in the city of Rajagrha, on the tenth day of the second half of the winter month, six years after attaining enlightenment,

東向坐食後兩人半影，

facing east, after eating, there were two and a half shadows of people,

為瓦師子長老達膩伽，

for the elder Dhanika the potter,

因瓶沙王及糞掃衣比丘制此戒。

This precept was established due to King Bimbisara and the monk with the rag-robes.

已制當隨順行，是名隨順法。(盜戒竟)

The precept established should be followed accordingly, this is called compliance with the precept. (End of precept on theft.)



摩訶僧祇律卷第三

The Third Scroll of the Mahasanghika Vinaya




