eady to help! Please provide the lines you need translated


【經文資訊】

[Scripture Information]

大正新脩大藏經

Taisho Revised Tripitaka

第 22 冊

Volume 22

No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律

No. 1425 Mahāsāṅghika Vinaya




【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12
[Version Record] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由

[Editing Instructions] This database is by

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依

The Corporate Body of the Buddha Educational Foundation (CBETA) according to

「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

the "Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo" edited.




原始資料

Original Data 

蕭鎮國大德提供

Provided by the esteemed Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain esteemed person in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

New punctuation provided by Master Shi Benchan 




其他事項

Other Matters

本資料庫可自由免費流通

This database can be freely circulated without charge

詳細內容請參閱

For more details, please refer to

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告

The copyright declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database




inly! Please provide the lines you would like to be translated


摩訶僧祇律第十二卷

Mohe Sangqi Vinaya, Scroll No. 12




東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translated by Buddhabhadra and Faxian of the Eastern Jin Dynasty from Tienzhu (ancient India)



明單提九十二事法之一  
One of the Ninety-two Rules of the Ming Single Mention




，廣說如上。

The Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and broadly explained as above.

爾時眾僧集在一處，欲作羯磨。

At that time, the monks gathered in one place, intending to perform a formal act.

長老尸利耶婆不來，即遣使往呼言：「長老！眾僧集，欲作法事。」

The elder Shīlīyepó did not come, so a messenger was sent to say, "Elder! The assembly of monks has gathered and wishes to conduct a religious function."

尸利耶婆念言：「正當為我故作羯磨耳。」

Shīlīyepó thought, "They are performing this formal act just because of me."

即心生畏怖，不得止而來。

Immediately fear arose in his mind, and he could not resist coming.

來已，諸比丘問言：「長老！汝犯僧伽婆尸沙耶？」

After he arrived, the monks asked, "Elder! Did you commit a Saṅghāvāsī offense?"

答言：「犯。」

He answered, "I did."

彼心生歡喜，作是念：「諸梵行人於我邊舉可懺悔事，非不可治事。」

In their hearts they rejoiced, thinking, "The noble ones around me announce a matter subject to confession, not something irrevocable."

白眾僧言：「聽我小出。」

He said to the assembly, "Allow me to step out for a moment."

諸比丘於後作是言：「此比丘多端不定出去已，須臾當作妄語，應三過定實問之。」

Afterwards, the monks said, "This monk is often unpredictable. Once he steps out, soon he will utter false words. We should confirm the facts through three questions."

是尸利耶婆出已，作是念：「我何故無事而受是罪？此諸比丘恒數數治我罪，我今不應受是罪，今寧妄語眾僧，當治我妄語罪，雖治故輕。」

After Shīlīyepó stepped out, he thought, "Why should I suffer this guilt for no reason? These monks frequently punish me. I should not accept this guilt. I would rather lie to the assembly and bear the penalty for falsehood, which, though a fault, is lighter."

諸比丘即呼尸利耶婆入，入已問言：「汝犯僧伽婆尸沙罪耶？」

The monks then called Shīlīyepó back in and asked, "Did you commit a Saṅghāvāsī offense?"

答言：「不犯。」

He answered, "I did not offend."

諸比丘問言：「汝向者何故言犯？」

The monks asked, "Why did you previously say you did?"

答言：「眾僧向者欲使我犯，是故我答言犯耳，我今不憶有罪。」

He answered, "The assembly wanted me to be accused, so I said I did, but I do not recall any offense."

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊，佛言：「呼尸利耶婆來。」

The monks reported this matter fully to the Blessed One, who said, "Call Shīlīyepó here."

來已具問上事：「汝實爾不？」

When he arrived, the full matter was inquired as before: "Is it true as stated?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He answered, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「此是惡事。汝常不聞，我無量方便呵責妄語、稱歎實語耶？」

The Buddha said, "This is a wrongful act. Have you not always heard me admonish against false speech in innumerable ways and praise truthfulness?"

汝今云何知而妄語？

"How could you knowingly utter false words now?"

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

"This is not in accordance with the Dharma, the Vinaya, or the teachings of the Buddha, and it cannot foster wholesome states."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」

The Buddha told the monks, "Assemble all the monks residing in Śrāvastī. For the sake of ten benefits, I establish a rule for the monks; even those who have heard should hear it again."

若比丘知而妄語，波夜提。」

"If a monk knowingly speaks falsehood, it is a pācittiya offense."


比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is one as described above.




知者，先念知。
The wise already know in their thoughts.




妄者，事不爾。
Full of tricks, things aren't as they seem.




語者，口業說。  
Speech is the spoken karma.




波夜提者，分別制罪名也。
Poya refers to the designation of specific offenses.




賢聖語八事、直說、妄不妄、疑不疑、決定、非決定、一向說。
The teachings of the sages speak of eight matters: straightforward speech, truth or untruth, doubt or certainty, resolution or irresolution, and consistent speech.

賢聖語八事者，見言見、聞言聞、妄言妄、識言識、不見言不見、不聞言不聞、不妄言不妄、不識言不識，是名八事賢聖語，無罪。
The eight matters spoken by the sages are: seeing and saying one saw, hearing and saying one heard, thinking and speaking unreal thoughts, knowing and speaking what one knows, not seeing and saying one did not see, not hearing and saying one did not hear, not thinking and speaking untruths, not knowing and speaking of what is unknown; these are called the eight truthful speeches of the sages, without fault.

八事非賢聖語者，見言不見、聞言不聞、妄言不妄、識言不識、不見言見、不聞言聞、不妄言妄、不識言識，是名八事非賢聖語，得波夜提罪。
The eight matters not spoken by the sages are: seeing and saying one did not see, hearing and saying one did not hear, thinking and speaking falsehoods, knowing and saying one does not know, not seeing and saying one saw, not hearing and saying one heard, not thinking and speaking falsehoods, not knowing and speaking as if knowing; these are called the eight untruthful speeches, which incur the offense against right speech.

直說者，見聞知識，不見不聞不知不識，是名直說，得波夜提罪。
Straightforward speech is to speak of what one has seen, heard, known, and understood, and not to speak of what was neither seen, heard, known, nor understood; this is called straightforward speech, which can incur the offense against right speech.

妄者，見妄言不妄、聞妄言不妄、知妄言不妄、識妄言不妄，不見不聞不知不識，妄言不妄，得波夜提罪。
Falsehood is seeing and falsely claiming not to see, hearing and falsely claiming not to hear, knowing and falsely claiming not to know, understanding and falsely claiming not to understand; seeing not, hearing not, knowing not, understanding not, and yet falsely claiming truths, incur the offense against right speech.

不妄者，見聞知識，不妄言妄，不見不聞不知不識，不妄言妄，得波夜提罪。
Truthfulness is seeing, hearing, knowing, and understanding truly and not falsely claiming truths, not seeing, hearing, knowing, or understanding, and yet not claiming falsehoods, incur the offense against right speech.

疑者，見聞知識，疑言不疑，不見不聞不知不識，疑言不疑，得波夜提罪。
Doubt is seeing, hearing, knowing, and understanding yet expressing untruth as doubt, not seeing, hearing, knowing, or understanding and yet expressing doubt truthfully, incur the offense against right speech.

不疑者，見聞知識，不疑言疑，不見不聞不知不識，不疑言疑，得波夜提罪。
Certainty is seeing, hearing, knowing, and understanding but expressing propositions of truth as doubt, not seeing, hearing, knowing or understanding and yet expressing truth as certainty, incur the offense against right speech.

決定者，見聞知識，決定言不決定，不見不聞不知不識，決定言不決定，得波夜提罪。
Resolution is seeing, hearing, knowing, and understanding yet expressing unresolved truth, not seeing, hearing, knowing, or understanding and yet expressing resolution, incur the offense against right speech.

不決定者，見聞知識，不決定言決定，不見不聞不知不識，不決定言決定，得波夜提罪。
Irresolution is seeing, hearing, knowing and understanding but expressing resolution as irresolution, not seeing, hearing, knowing, or understanding and yet expressing resolution truthfully, incur the offense against right speech.

一向說者，見聞知識言不見不聞不知不識，得波夜提罪。
Consistent speech is seeing, hearing, knowing, and understanding while declaring inconsistencies, incur the offense against right speech.

知有而言無，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Knowing there is and saying there is not, speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

知無言有，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Knowing there is not and saying there is, speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實有謂無而言有，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually having and claiming not to have while saying one has, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實無謂有而言無，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually not having and claiming to have while saying one does not have, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實有有想而言無，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually having with thoughts of having and speaking as if not, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實無無想而言有，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually not having with no thoughts of having and speaking as if having, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實有無想而言有，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually having with no thoughts of having and speaking as if having, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.

實無有想而言無，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
Actually not having with thoughts of having and speaking as if not, knowing and speaking falsely, incurs the offense against right speech.



有五法成就，知而妄語，得波夜提罪。
There are five factors, when possessed, result in the offense of false speech.

何等五？
What are the five?

實有、有想、轉心、背想、異口說，是為五事；
They are: fact, intention, mental engagement, underlying thought, verbal expression.

知而妄語，波夜提。
Knowing it is false speech results in a 'Pācittiya' offense.

有四法成就，知而妄語，波夜提。
There are four factors, when possessed, result in the offense of false speech.

何等四？
What are the four?

有想、轉心、背想、異口說，是為四；
They are: intention, mental engagement, underlying thought, verbal expression.

知而妄語，波夜提。
Knowing it is false speech results in a 'Pācittiya' offense.

有三法成就，知而妄語，波夜提。
There are three factors, when possessed, result in the offense of false speech.

何等三？
What are the three?

轉心、背想、異口說；
They are: mental engagement, underlying thought, verbal expression.

知而妄語，波夜提。
Knowing it is false speech results in a 'Pācittiya' offense.

有二法成就，知而妄語，波夜提。
There are two factors, when possessed, result in the offense of false speech.

何等二？
What are the two?

背想、異口說；
They are: underlying thought, verbal expression.

知而妄語，波夜提。
Knowing it is false speech results in a 'Pācittiya' offense.

有一法成就，知而妄語，波夜提。
There is one factor, when possessed, results in the offense of false speech.

何等一？
What is the one?

異口說；
Verbal expression.

知而妄語，波夜提，是故說。
Knowing it is false speech results in a 'Pācittiya' offense, thus it is said.



，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, expounding as mentioned above.

爾時六群比丘軟語誘問諸年少比丘言：「汝名字何等？汝家姓何等？父母名字何等？汝家本作何生業？」
At that time, six groups of monks gently asked the novice monks, saying, "What are your names? What is your family name? What are your parents' names? What is your family's occupation?"

年少比丘其性質直，以實而答：「我家如是、如是姓名、如是生業。」
The novice monks, being straightforward by nature, answered truthfully, "My family name is such-and-such, and our occupation is such-and-such."

彼六群比丘於後嫌恨時，便作是言：「汝是極下賤種，汝是旃陀羅、剃髮師、織師、瓦師、皮師。」
Later, when those six groups of monks found fault, they said, "You are of the lowest caste, you are chandala, barbers, weavers, potters, leather workers."

年少比丘聞此語已，極懷慚羞。諸比丘聞已，往白世尊。
Hearing these words, the novice monks felt great shame. The monks heard this and went to the Blessed One to report it.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call those six groups of monks to come here."

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實軟語誘問諸年少比丘，後嫌恨便說乃至瓦師皮師耶？」
When they came, the Buddha asked those six groups of monks, "Did you actually use gentle words to ask the novice monks, then later criticize them, calling them potters and leather workers?"

答言：「實爾。」
They answered, "Indeed, we did."

佛言：「此是惡事。六群比丘！汝云何於梵行人邊作種類形相語，如《難提本生經》中廣說。」
The Buddha said, "This is a bad deed. O monks of six groups! How could you speak in terms of caste and occupation to those practicing the holy life, as extensively explained in the Nandibana Jataka?"

乃至佛告諸比丘：「畜生尚惡毀呰，況復人乎！」
The Buddha spoke to the monks, saying, "Even animals shun spiteful words, let alone humans!"

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。若比丘種類形相語，波夜提。」
The Buddha told the monks, "All those residing in Sravasti should gather, for the sake of the Ten Benefits, I hereby establish a rule for the monks: Those who speak in terms of caste and occupation should confess an offense of expiation."




比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as previously explained.




種類毀呰有七事：種姓、業、相貌、病、罪、罵、結使。
There are seven ways of defamation: caste, work, appearance, illness, sin, insults, and fetters.




種姓者，下中上。
Castes are categorized as lower, middle, and upper.

下者，汝是旃陀羅、剃毛師、織師、瓦師、皮師種姓。
The lower caste includes Chandala, barbers, weavers, potters, and leather workers.

若作此語，使彼慚羞，得波夜提罪。
If you use these words to cause them shame, you will get an offense.

若言：「汝父母是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。」
If you say: "Your parents are Chandala, up to leather workers."

作是語使彼慚羞，波夜提。
These words cause them shame, resulting in an offense.

若言：「汝和上、阿闍梨是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。」
If you say: "Your spiritual mentor is Chandala, up to leather workers."

使彼慚羞，得偷蘭遮。
Causing them shame results in an offense.

若言：「汝同友知識是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。」
If you say: "Your colleagues or acquaintances are Chandala, up to leather workers."

作是語使彼慚羞，越毘尼罪，是名下。
These words cause shame and result in an infraction, categorizing them as lower.

中者言：「汝等是中間種姓。」
For middle, saying: "You are of the middle caste."

作是語欲使彼人慚羞者，得偷蘭罪。
These words intended to shame result in an offense.

若言：「汝父母是中間種姓。」
If you say: "Your parents are of the middle caste."

得偷蘭罪。
Results in an offense.

若言：「汝和上、阿闍梨是中間種姓。」
If you say: "Your spiritual mentor is of the middle caste."

欲使彼慚羞者，越毘尼罪。
Words intended to shame result in an infraction.

若言：「汝同友知識是中間種姓。」
If you say: "Your colleagues or acquaintances are of the middle caste."

欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼心悔，是名中間。
Words intended to cause shame lead to regret, indicating the middle caste.

上者，語其人言：「汝是剎利婆羅門種。」
For the upper, tell the person: "You are of the Kshatriya or Brahmin caste."

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，越毘尼罪。
These words, intended to shame, result in an infraction.

若言：「汝父母是剎利婆羅門種。」
If you say: "Your parents are of the Kshatriya or Brahmin caste."

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼罪。
These words, intended to shame, result in an infraction.

若言：「汝和上、阿闍梨是剎利婆羅門種。」
If you say: "Your spiritual mentor is of the Kshatriya or Brahmin caste."

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼罪。
These words, intended to shame, result in an infraction.

若言：「汝同友知識是剎利婆羅門種。」
If you say: "Your colleagues or acquaintances are of the Kshatriya or Brahmin caste."

欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼心悔，是名種姓。
Words intended to cause shame lead to regret, indicating the caste system.




業者，下中上。
There are workers, classified as inferior, medium, and superior.

下者若言：「汝是屠兒、賣猪人、漁獵人、捕鳥人、張摾人、守城人、魁膾人。」
The inferior jobs are such as a butcher, a pig seller, a fisherman, a bird catcher, a net setter, a city guard, or a carpenter.

作是語欲使彼人慚羞者，得波夜提罪；父母亦如是。
If these words are spoken to embarrass someone, it results in a Pacittiya offense; it is the same for parents.

若言：「汝和上、阿闍梨是屠兒乃至魁膾。」
If one says that your teacher or preceptor is a butcher or a carpenter,

得偷蘭罪。
the offense is a Thullaccaya offense.

若言：「汝同友知識是屠兒乃至魁膾。」
If one says that your friends or acquaintances are butchers or carpenters,

得越毘尼罪，是名下業。
it results in a minor Vinaya offense, which is termed inferior work.

中者，言：「汝是賣香人、坐店肆人、田作人、種菜人、汝是通使人。」
The medium jobs include being a perfume seller, a shopkeeper, a farmer, a vegetable grower, or a messenger.

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，得偷蘭罪；父母亦如是。
If these words are spoken to cause shame, the offense is a Thullaccaya; the same applies to parents.

若言汝和上、阿闍梨者，得越毘尼罪。
If one says these about your teacher or preceptor, it results in a minor Vinaya offense.

若言汝同友知識，欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼心悔，是名中業。
If one says the same about friends or acquaintances, intending to cause shame, it results in minor remorse, termed medium work.

上業者，若言：「汝是居金、銀、摩尼、銅器店肆人。」
The superior jobs include those who work in gold, silver, gems, or bronze shops.

作是語欲令彼人慚羞者，得越毘尼罪；
If these words are spoken to cause embarrassment, it results in a minor Vinaya offense;

父母、和上、阿闍梨亦如是。
parents, teachers, or preceptors, it is the same.

若言同友知識，得越毘尼心悔，是名上業。
If one says this about friends or acquaintances, it results in minor Vinaya remorse, termed superior work.




相貌者，下中上。

Appearance: lower, middle, and upper.

下者，若言：「汝是瞎眼、曲脊、跛脚、臂如鳥翅、榼頭、鋸齒。」

The lower category includes expressions like: "You are blind, have a crooked spine, lame, with arms like bird wings, a head like a gourd, jagged teeth."

作是語使彼慚羞者，得波夜提罪；父母亦爾。

To say such things to cause shame incurs a Pārājika offense; the same applies to parents.

和上、阿闍梨，偷蘭罪。

To a monk or Acharya, it incurs a Stealing offense.

同友知識，越毘尼罪，是名下相貌。

To peers or acquaintances, it incurs a transgression offense, known as the lower appearance.

中者，汝是大黑、大白、大黃、大赤。

Middle category includes expressions like: "You are very black, very white, very yellow, very red."

作是語，使彼慚羞者，得偷蘭罪；父母亦爾。

Saying this to cause shame incurs a Stealing offense; it applies to parents too.

和上、阿闍梨，得越毘尼罪。

To a monk or Acharya, it incurs a transgression offense.

同友知識，得越毘尼心悔，是名中相貌。

To peers or acquaintances, it leads to a remorseful transgression, known as the middle appearance.

上者，言：「汝有三十二相圓光金色。」

Upper category includes saying: "You have the thirty-two marks with a golden radiance."

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，得越毘尼罪；父母、和上、阿闍梨亦爾。

Saying this intending to cause shame incurs a transgression offense; it applies to parents and teachers too.

同友知識，得越毘尼心悔，是名上相貌。

To peers or acquaintances, it leads to a remorseful transgression, known as the upper appearance.




病者，無有下中上，一切病盡名下：「汝等癬疥、黃爛、癩病、癰疽、痔病、不禁、黃病、瘧病、痟羸病、癲狂，如是等種種病。」
For the sick, there is no inferior, moderate, or superior; all diseases are collectively called inferior: "You who suffer from scabies, jaundice, leprosy, abscesses, hemorrhoids, incontinence, jaundice, malaria, emaciation, insanity, and various such diseases."

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，得波夜提罪；父母亦爾。
Speaking in this way to make someone feel ashamed, one incurs a Pārājika offense; the same applies to parents.

和上、阿闍梨，得偷蘭罪。
For preceptors and teachers, one incurs a minor theft offense.

同友知識，越毘尼罪，是名病。
For fellow friends and associates, one commits a breach of the Vinaya offense; this is called an ailment.




罪者，無上中下，一切罪盡名下：「汝犯波羅夷、僧伽婆尸沙、波夜提、波羅提提舍尼、越毘尼罪。」

For offenders, regardless of their position, all sins are called: "You have committed Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Parajika Anantariya, and Patidesaniya."

作是語，使彼慚羞者，波夜提；父母亦爾。

These words make those who feel shame receive Pacittiya; the same applies to one's parents.

和上、阿闍梨，偷蘭罪。

Elders and teachers are associated with the Thullaccaya offense.

同友知識，越毘尼，是名罪。

Friends and acquaintances are associated with the Vinayatikrama offense, which is called a sin.




罵者，無有下中上，
One who scolds does not discriminate between lower, middle, or upper.

一切罵盡名下，
All are scolded and categorized as low.

作世間罵：婬逸、污穢、一切惡罵。
Worldly scolding includes licentiousness, filth, and all kinds of vicious curses.

作是語欲使彼慚羞者，
Using such words to make others feel ashamed,

得波夜提；父母亦爾。
results in a Pārājika offense; the same applies to one's parents.

和上、阿闍梨偷蘭罪。
For a teacher or spiritual mentor, it's a Stealing Sin.

同友知識，得越毘尼罪，是名罵。
For peers or acquaintances, it results in a Violation of the Vinaya offense; this is called scolding.




結使者，無下中上，一切結使盡名下：

The instigator is neither inferior, middle, nor superior, and all instigators are called inferior:

「汝是愚癡闇鈍無知人，猶如泥團；如羊白鵠角鵄。」

"You are a foolish, ignorant person without understanding, like a clump of mud; like a sheep, a white swan, or a horned owl."

作如是種種語，使彼慚羞者，

By speaking such various statements, causing them to feel ashamed,

得，波夜提；

Is an offense requiring expiation;

父母亦爾。

So too are parents.

和上、阿闍梨，偷蘭罪。

To preceptors and teachers, it is a Thulaan offense.

同友知識，得越毘尼罪。

To fellow friends and teachers, it is a minor offense against the Vinaya.



若比丘作如上七事種類毀呰者，得波夜提。
If a monk engages in the above seven types of disparaging actions, he commits a pācittiya offense.

種類毀呰比丘尼者，偷蘭罪。
For a monk who disparages a nun, it is a thullaccaya offense.

式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，得越毘尼罪。
For a sikkhamānā, novice monk, or novice nun, it results in a duṣkṛta offense.

種類俗人，得越毘尼心悔，是故說。
For laypeople, it leads to an offense of dukkata, which requires mental acknowledgment of wrongdoing, thus it is stated.



城，廣說如上。

The Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti and spoke extensively as above.

時六群比丘方便誘問諸年少比丘：「汝識某甲比丘父母種姓事業不？」

At that time, a group of six monks cleverly asked the young novice monks, "Do you know the family, caste, and occupation of a certain monk?"

彼年少比丘其性質直，隨事而說。

These young monks, being straightforward by nature, spoke according to the matter.

六群比丘於後瞋恚時，作是言：「汝是旃陀羅、剃髮師、織師、瓦師、皮師種姓。」

The six monks later, when angry, said, "You belong to the caste of an outcaste, barber, weaver, potter, or tanner."

作是語已，復言：「我自不知，是某甲比丘說汝耳！」

Having said this, they further claimed, "I didn't know it myself, it was a certain monk who told me about you!"

比丘聞是語已，極生慚羞。

The monks, upon hearing these words, felt extremely ashamed.

諸比丘以是因緣，往白世尊，

The monks, due to this incident, went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」

The Buddha said, "Call the group of six monks here."

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實誘問諸年少比丘，乃至比丘慚羞不？」

After they came, the Buddha asked the group of six monks, "Did you really question the young monks, causing them to feel ashamed?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

They replied, "Yes, indeed, Blessed One!"

佛言：「汝何故如是耶？」

The Buddha said, "Why did you do this?"

答言：「我作是事，用以快樂。」

They answered, "I did it for pleasure."

佛言：「癡人！此是惡事。於梵行人邊作兩舌，此是苦事，方言為樂。」

The Buddha said, "Foolish men! This is a bad act. To cause discord among the spiritual practitioners is a painful deed, yet you claim it gives you pleasure."

佛無數方便呵責已，為說因緣，如《三獸本生經》中廣說。

The Buddha reproached them in countless ways, explaining the causes as elaborated in the Jataka tale of the Three Animals.

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Let all who dwell in Shravasti gather, for ten benefits I will establish a precept for the monks, so that those who have heard it before may hear it again.

若比丘兩舌者，波夜提。」

If a monk uses divisive speech, it entails a Pacittiya offense.


比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, as mentioned above.




兩舌者，有七事。
Those who are double-tongued have seven matters.

何等七種？
What are these seven types?

姓、業、相貌、病、罪、罵、結使。
Name, work, appearance, illness, crime, scolding, causing attachment.




種姓者，下中上。
There are three castes: lower, middle, and upper.

下者，汝是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。
The lower is when someone says you are from the Chandala caste or a leatherworker.

復言：「誰知汝？是某甲說。」
Then they say, "Who knows you? It is someone who says so."

作是念：「欲離彼令與己合。」
They think, "To separate them and bring them closer to me."

若彼離不離，得波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it leads to a disciplinary offense.

若言：「汝父母是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。」
If they say, "Your parents are Chandalas or leatherworkers."

復言：「誰知汝？是某甲比丘說。」
Then they say, "Who knows you? It is a certain monk who says so."

作是念：「欲別離彼令與己合。」
They think, "To separate them and bring them closer to me."

若彼離不離，皆波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it results in a disciplinary offense. 

若言：「汝和上、阿闍梨是旃陀羅，乃至皮師。」
If they say, "Your superior or teacher is a Chandala or a leatherworker."

亦波夜提。
This also results in a disciplinary offense.

同友知識，亦如是。
It is the same for friends and acquaintances.

是名下。
This is called the lower caste.

中者，言：「長老！汝是中間姓、吏兵姓、伎兒姓。」
For the middle, they say, "Elder! You are of the intermediate, official, or entertainer caste."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」
Then they say, "I don't know you, it is just someone who says so!"

若作是念：「欲離彼令與己合。」
If they think, "To separate them and bring them closer to me."

若離不離，皆波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it results in a disciplinary offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提。
If this concerns parents, superiors, teachers, or friends, it all results in a disciplinary offense.

是名中。
This is called the middle caste.

上者，若言：「長老！汝是剎利、婆羅門種。」
For the upper, they say, "Elder! You are of the Kshatriya or Brahmin caste."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說。」
Then they say, "I don't know you, it is someone who says so."

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」
If they think, "To separate them and draw them to myself."

若彼離不離，波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it results in a disciplinary offense.

若言：「汝父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識。」
If they say, "Your parents, superiors, teachers, friends."

皆波夜提，是名上。
All result in a disciplinary offense, this is called the upper caste.

是謂種姓。
This is what is meant by caste.



業者，下中上。

Professionals, there are lower, medium, and higher levels.

下者，汝是屠兒乃至魁膾。

The lower refers to being a butcher or a chief of chefs.

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

It is said, "I don't know you; it was so-and-so who told me!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one thinks, "to separate them so they turn to myself,"

彼若離不離，皆波夜提。

whether they separate or not, it's an offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名下。

If it involves parents, teachers, mentors, or friends, it's an offense, called lower.

中者。

The medium level.

汝是賣香肆上人，乃至通使人。

You are a perfume seller, up to being an envoy.

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

It is said, "I don't know you; it was so-and-so who told me!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one thinks, "to separate them so they turn to myself,"

若離不離，皆波夜提。

whether they separate or not, it's an offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名中。

If it involves parents, teachers, mentors, or friends, it's an offense, called medium.

上者，汝是金銀肆乃至銅肆上人。

The higher refers to being a master in gold, silver, or copper shops.

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

It is said, "I don't know you; it was so-and-so who told me!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one thinks, "to separate them so they turn to myself,"

彼若離不離，波夜提。

whether separated or not, it's an offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名上，是謂業。

If it involves parents, teachers, mentors, or friends, it's an offense, called higher; this is called karma.



相貌者，下中上。

Appearance is categorized into lower, middle, and upper.

下者，若言：「汝瞎眼乃至鋸齒。」

The lower is, if one says: "You are blind even to the extent of having serrated teeth."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

And then says: "I do not know you, it's just what someone said!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one has the thought: "I want to separate them and bring them to my side."

彼若離不離，波夜提。

If they separate or not, it is an offense (Pārājika).

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名下。

If involving parents, teachers, mentors, or fellow friends and acquaintances, it is an offense (Pārājika), and this is called lower.

中者，若言：「汝大黑、大白、大黃、大赤。」

The middle is, if one says: "You are very dark, very white, very yellow, very red."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

And then says: "I don't know you, it's just what someone said!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one has the thought: "I want to separate them and bring them to my side."

若彼離不離，波夜提。

If they separate or not, it is an offense (Pārājika).

父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名中。

If involving parents, teachers, mentors, or fellow friends and acquaintances, it is an offense (Pārājika), and this is called middle.

上者，若言：「汝有三十二相圓光金色」。

The upper is, if one says: "You have the thirty-two marks of a great man and a circular aureole of golden color."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」

And then says: "I don't know you, it's just what someone said!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」

If one has the thought: "I want to separate them and bring them to my side."

若彼離不離，波夜提。

If they separate or not, it is an offense (Pārājika).

父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名上。

If involving parents, teachers, mentors, or fellow friends and acquaintances, it is an offense (Pārājika), and this is called upper.



病者。
The sick person.

無下中上，一切病皆名下。
There is no distinction of lower, middle, or higher; all illnesses are considered lower.

若言：「汝有癬疥乃至癲狂。」
If it is said, "You have sores, scabies, or even madness."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」
And yet say, "I do not know you, it is just something someone said!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」
If one thinks, "I want to separate them and have them come to me."

若彼離不離，波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it is a transgression.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名病。
Whether it be parents, mentors, teachers, peers, or acquaintances, it is all considered a transgression and is called a disease.




罪者，無有下中上，一切罪皆名下。  
For offenses, there is no lower, middle, or upper; all offenses are called lower.

若言：「汝犯波羅夷，乃至越毘尼罪。」  
If one says, "You have committed a Parajika offense, even up to a transgression of the Vinaya."

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」  
And then says, "I do not know you, it was so-and-so who said it!"

作是念：「欲別離彼令與己合。」  
If thinking, "I want to separate them to unite with myself."

若彼離不離，波夜提。  
Whether they separate or not, it's a Patidesaniya offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提。  
If it's with parents, teachers, friends, or acquaintances, it's all a Patidesaniya offense.




罵者，無下中上，一切罵皆名下。
Insults, whether low, medium, or high, are all called inferior.

作世間惡罵、婬穢、醜惡語。
Using worldly insults, obscene, or ugly language.

若作如是罵，乃至離不離，波夜提。
If such insults are made, whether one departs or not, it's a Pārājika.

若言汝父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名罵。
If saying ‘your parents, teacher, preceptor, or friends,’ it’s a Pārājika, which is called an insult.




結使者，無有下中上，一切結使皆名下。
In terms of mental fetters, there's no distinction of low, medium, or high; all ties are considered low.

「汝是愚癡人，闇鈍無知，猶如泥聚，亦如牛羊白鵠角鵄。」
"You are a foolish person, dull and ignorant, like a heap of mud, also like a cow, sheep, or a white swan's claw."

作如是種種語。
Utter such various words.

復言：「我不知汝，是某甲說耳！」
And further say: "I don't know you, it's just so-and-so speaking!"

若作是念：「欲別離彼令向己。」
If one has this thought: "Desiring to separate them and make them come to oneself."

若彼離不離，波夜提。
Whether they separate or not, it is an offense.

若父母、和上、阿闍梨、同友知識，皆波夜提，是名結使。
If they involve parents, elders, teachers, or friends, it is an offense, this is called a mental fetter.




於比丘所兩舌，波夜提。
Double-tongued words to a monk incur a grave offense.

於比丘尼所兩舌，偷蘭罪。
Double-tongued words to a nun incur a lesser offense.

於式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，越毘尼。
Double-tongued words to a novice monk or novice nun violate the precepts.

於俗人，越毘尼心悔，是故說。
Double-tongued words to a layperson violate the precepts with remorse, thus it is said.




，廣說如上。

The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and expounded extensively as above.

時六群比丘，知眾僧如法如律滅諍事已，作是言：「此事不了，當更斷。」

At that time, the six groups of monks, knowing that the Sangha had resolved disputes in compliance with Dharma and Vinaya, said, "This matter is not resolved, it should be dealt with further."

六群比丘作此語已，還諍事起，不和合住。

After the six groups of monks said this, disputes arose again and they did not live in harmony.

諸比丘以是事往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」

The monks went to report this matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call the six groups of monks here."

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實知眾僧如法如律滅諍已，更發起耶？」

When they came, the Buddha asked the six groups of monks, "Did you indeed know that the Sangha had resolved disputes in compliance with Dharma and Vinaya, yet you restarted them?"

答言：「實爾。」

They replied, "Indeed."

佛言：「何故如是？」

The Buddha said, "Why is it so?"

答言：「我作如是方便以為樂。」

They replied, "I did so as a method for pleasure."

佛言：「癡人！惱亂梵行人，此是惡事。云何為樂？」

The Buddha said, "Foolish people! Disturbing the people of the holy life, this is evil. How can it be pleasurable?"

佛語六群比丘：「汝常不聞，我以無數方便讚歎於梵行人所身常行慈、口心行慈耶？常應恭敬。

The Buddha said to the six groups of monks, "Have you not often heard me, with countless methods, praise those of holy life who practice kindness in body, speech, and mind? They should always be respected.

汝今云何作是惡事？

How then do you now commit such evil acts?

此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

This is neither Dharma, nor Vinaya, nor in accordance with Buddha's teaching. It cannot nurture good Dharma."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Let all those residing in Shravasti gather. For ten benefits, I establish a rule for the monks. Those who have already heard should hear it again.

若比丘，知僧如法如律滅諍事已，還更發起，作是言：『此羯磨不了，當更作。』如是因緣不異者，波夜提。」

If a monk, knowing that the Sangha has resolved a dispute in compliance with Dharma and Vinaya, yet restarts it, saying, 'This act is not clear, it should be done again,' and if the situation is the same, there will be a breach (of the rules)."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is, as stated above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
The wise one knows either from self-awareness or from hearing it from others.




僧者，八種，如上說。
Monks are of eight kinds, as mentioned above.




相言諍
Argument by mutual words

誹謗諍
Argument by slander

罪諍
Argument by fault

常所行事諍
Argument by regular activities




如法如律滅諍事者，七滅諍事中，一一如法如律。
Those who resolve disputes according to the Dharma and discipline do so in each of the seven ways of settling disputes, each way following the Dharma and discipline.




滅已更發舉，

Eliminated and then re-raised,

如是因緣不異者，

If circumstances do not differ thus,

波夜提。

Bo-yay-ti.



波夜提者，如上說。

Propati (Bodhisattva Precepts), as stated above.




四諍者，相言諍、誹謗諍、罪諍、常所行事諍。
The four disputes: verbal disputes, slander disputes, transgression disputes, and customary conduct disputes.

相言諍事，用三毘尼一一滅。
Verbal disputes are resolved using the three Vinaya methods, one by one.

何等三？
What are the three?

現前毘尼滅、多覓毘尼滅、布草毘尼滅。
Present Vinaya resolution, much-seeking Vinaya resolution, and grass-strewing Vinaya resolution.



現前毘尼者，佛住舍衛城，時拘睒彌比丘鬪諍相言、同止不和合法言、非法律言、非律罪言、非罪重罪輕罪、可治不可治法、羯磨非法羯磨、和合羯磨、不和合羯磨、應作不應作。
At this time, in Śrāvastī, there was a dispute among the monks of Kośambī, arguing about what is right and wrong, in accordance with the Dhamma, or not in accordance, what is a minor or major offense, what can be remediated, and what cannot, regarding formal acts or not, and proper or improper conduct.

爾時坐中一比丘作是語：「諸大德！此非法、非律，與修多羅不相應、毘尼不相應、優波提舍不相應，與修多羅、毘尼、優波提舍相違，起諸染漏。
Then one monk said, "Venerable sirs, this is not in accordance with Dharma or Vinaya. It does not agree with the Sutta, Vinaya, or the Explanatory Discourses and opposes these teachings, leading to defilements.

如我所說，是法、是律、是佛教，與修多羅、毘尼、優波提舍相應，不生染漏。」
As I have stated, this is in accordance with the Dharma, Vinaya, and Buddha's teachings; it aligns with the Sutta, Vinaya, and Explanatory Discourses, leading to no defilements.

是比丘言：「諸大德！我不能滅此諍，我詣舍衛城，到世尊所，當問滅此諍事。」
The monk said, "Venerable sirs, I can't resolve this dispute. I will go to Śrāvastī to consult the Blessed One for advice on resolving it."

是比丘到已，頭面禮佛足却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！拘睒彌諸比丘鬪諍相言、同止不和合，所謂法非法，乃至我不能滅此諍事，當往世尊所，問滅此諍事。
Upon arriving, the monk paid respect to the Buddha, stood aside and said, "Blessed One, the monks of Kośambī are in dispute and cannot agree on what is according to the Dharma and what isn’t. I cannot resolve this on my own, so I have come to seek your guidance."

唯願世尊為諸比丘滅此諍事。」
I wish the Blessed One would resolve this dispute among the monks.

爾時世尊告優波離：「汝往詣拘睒彌國，如法如律滅此諍事。所謂現前毘尼滅。
The Buddha then addressed Upāli: "Go to Kośambī and resolve the dispute according to the Dhamma and Vinaya. This is called the 'immediate Vinaya resolution.'

優波離！諍事有三處起：若一人、若眾多、若僧，亦應三處捨、三處取、三處滅。
Upāli, disputes arise from three causes: an individual, a group, and the sangha. They should be handled with three approaches: dismiss, accept, and address.

優波離！汝往詣拘睒彌比丘所，如法如律滅此諍事，所謂現前毘尼滅。」
Upāli, go to the Kośambī monks and resolve the dispute according to the Dhamma and Vinaya, known as the 'immediate Vinaya.'

尊者優波離白佛言：「世尊！比丘成就幾法，能滅此諍事。」
Venerable Upāli said, "Blessed One, how many principles must a monk possess to resolve this dispute?"

佛告優波離：「比丘成就五法，能滅諍事。何等五？
The Buddha told Upāli, "A monk must have five qualities to resolve disputes. What are these five?

知是實非是不實、是利益非不利益、得伴非不得伴、得平等伴非不得平等伴、得時非不得時。
Know what is true, not untrue; what is beneficial, not unbeneficial; how to gain support, not lose support; how to gain equitable support, not lose equitable support; how to seize the right time, not the wrong time.

優波離！若非時斷事，或破僧、或僧諍、或僧離散；若得時滅諍者，僧不破、不諍、不分散。
Upāli, if you address issues at the wrong time, it may disrupt the Sangha, lead to disputes, or fracture it. If you resolve disputes at the right time, the Sangha will not break, argue or split.

是為五法成就比丘能滅諍事，為諸梵行者，愛念稱讚。
These five qualities enable a monk to resolve disputes and bring joy and praise from others devoted to the religious life.

今汝往至拘睒彌比丘所，如法如律如佛教斷事，所謂現前毘尼滅。」
Now you should go to the Kośambī monks and settle their disputes according to the Dharma, Vinaya, and the Buddha's teaching, thus achieving the 'immediate Vinaya.'"

爾時尊者優波離禮世尊足已，往拘睒彌比丘所言：「長老！還去到彼諍事起處，當彼間滅，莫此間斷事。
Then Venerable Upāli honored the Blessed One's feet and went to the Kośambī monks, saying, "Elders, return to where the dispute arose and settle it there. Do not resolve it here.

何以故？此間眾僧和合歡喜不諍，共一學住，不應擾亂。」
Why? Because here the monks are harmonious, joyful, and without conflict, living as one community, and should not be disturbed."

爾時拘睒彌比丘白尊者優波離言：「大德！我若能於彼滅諍事者，不來詣此。
The Kośambī monks then said to Venerable Upāli, "Great Elder, if I could resolve the dispute there, I would not have come here.

唯願尊者為我至彼滅此諍事。」
I earnestly wish the Venerable to come with me to resolve this dispute."

優波離言：「我若往到彼，應作羯磨者作羯磨，應治罰者當罰之。
Upāli said, "If I go there, I will perform the required formal acts and administer the necessary penalties.

應作折伏羯磨、不語羯磨、發喜羯磨、擯出羯磨、舉羯磨、別住羯磨、摩那埵羯磨、阿浮呵那羯磨，有如是如是過，我當作如是羯磨治，汝等爾時心莫不悅。」
Whether it's a formal admonishment, silence, rejoicing, expulsion, exclusion, restriction, probation, or censure, for specific offenses, I will perform the necessary acts. May your minds be at peace then."

彼使比丘白尊者優波離言：「我等若有如是過，當受如是治，心無不悅。」
The monks then said to Venerable Upāli, "If we indeed have such faults, we will accept such remedies with a glad heart."

時尊者優波離復至佛所，白佛言：「世尊！欲滅彼比丘諍事，當云何用心？」
Then Venerable Upāli returned to the Buddha and said, "Blessed One, how should one focus to resolve these monks' disputes?"

佛告優波離：「欲滅諍事者，當先自籌量身力、福德力、辯才力、無畏力，知事緣起，比丘先自思量有如是等力。
The Buddha told Upāli, "To resolve disputes, one must first assess their strength, merit, eloquence, and courage; understand the origins of the situation, and contemplate whether they possess these strengths.

又此諍事起來未久，此人心調軟，諍事易可滅，此比丘爾時應作滅諍。
If the dispute arose recently and the participants’ minds are flexible, the dispute can be easily resolved; the monk should then attempt to settle it.

若自思量無上諸力，諍事起已久，其人剛強非可卒滅，當求大德比丘共滅此事。
If, upon reflection, one finds themselves lacking in strength and the dispute has persisted, making the participants obstinate and difficult to resolve, seek help from senior monks to settle it together.

若無大德比丘者，當求多聞比丘；若無多聞者，當求阿練若比丘；若無阿練若比丘者，當求大勢力優婆塞。
If there are no senior monks, seek out well-learned monks; if there are none, seek forest-dwelling monks; if there are none, seek lay followers of great influence.

彼諍比丘見優婆塞已，心生慚愧諍事易滅。
When the disputing monks see these lay followers, they will feel ashamed, making the dispute easier to resolve.

若復無此優婆塞者，當求於王、若大臣有勢力者，彼諍比丘見此豪勢，心生敬畏諍事易滅。
If there are no such lay followers, seek local kings or state ministers. The presence of these powerful figures can induce respect and fear, facilitating the resolution of disputes.

若在冬時滅此諍事者，當於無風寒溫煖屏處治，客比丘來當與爐火。
In winter, resolve disputes in a warm, draft-free area, and provide visiting monks with a hearth to warm themselves.

若是春時，當於涼處，若樹下敷床座，行冷水漿飲，當以扇扇。
In spring, choose a cool spot under trees, spread seats, offer cold drinks, and use fans.

若是夏時，當於高涼處，隨時所須事事供給。
In summer, find high, cool places and meet all the necessary needs accordingly.

爾時當舉一堪能比丘，有黠慧、知事因緣、不怯弱、不求他過、不畏眾人。
At that time, select a capable monk who is wise, understands the reasons for matters, is neither timid nor fault-finding, and is unafraid of the many.

若優婆塞來，當為讚歎和合僧功德。
When lay followers arrive, extol the virtues of a harmonious community.

復語優婆塞：『如世尊說，一法出世令天人苦惱天人失利。所謂一法者，壞亂眾僧。
Also tell lay followers: 'The Blessed One spoke of one factor that causes suffering and loss to celestial and human beings—the discord among the Sangha.

身壞命終，直入泥黎。又優婆塞！如世尊說，一法出世天人安樂天人得利。所謂一法者，和合眾僧。
With a failing body and at life's end, it leads to hell. Conversely, the Blessed One also mentioned that one law granted peace and benefits to celestial and human beings: the harmony of the Sangha.

身壞命終，得生善處，天上人中。如是優婆塞欲得大功德者，當和合眾僧。』
At the end of life, it leads to rebirth in favorable realms among gods and humans. Hence, lay followers seeking great merit should promote Sangha harmony.'

二眾語時，是比丘應諦觀其事，取其語字句義味。」
During talks between the two groups, the monks should carefully observe the matters discussed, choosing words that convey true meaning.

時坐中有比丘，非闥賴吒比丘，作闥賴吒相，作是語：「聽諸大德！本作如是語，今作如是語，不相應時。
Among the monks present, one without the name Dharṇithika put on the appearance of Dharṇithika, and said, "Listen, Venerable Ones! At first, I spoke in one way, and now I speak differently, not in sync with the previous time.

此人若性軟可折伏者，應僧中語令羞愧。
One with a soft nature should feel ashamed by gentle reproach within the Sangha.

汝不善作不和合事，作不和合見。眾僧今日為是事故，於此中集。」
You do not foster harmony, nor do you hold harmonious views. The monk community gathers today because of this incident in this place."

若是惡人執性剛暴，能增長諍事，應作軟語，語言：「長老！眾僧今日聚集，為滅此事故，我當共長老作伴，和合滅此諍事。」
If a stubborn person tends toward violent behavior that fosters disputes, speak gently: "Elder! Today the Sangha gathers to resolve this matter. I want to support you in finding harmony to resolve this dispute."

若是比丘心意柔軟已，爾時僧斷事人語有事比丘言：「汝今出此事。」
When a monk’s mind is softened, the monk presiding over the matter should tell the accused monk, "You should now withdraw from this matter."

此比丘作如是言：「我今出此事，願僧與我如法如律斷。」
If the monk declares, "I now withdraw from this matter, may the Sangha handle it according to the Dhamma and Vinaya,"

爾時應呵責此人令慚羞，應語：「汝不善，何有眾僧非法非律斷事。」
They should be reprimanded, made to feel ashamed, and told, "You’re in the wrong. How could you want the Sangha to handle matters outside the Dhamma and Vinaya?"

彼比丘若言：「我未曾僧中語，願眾僧教我儀法。」
If the monk says, "I have not yet spoken in the Sangha. May the assembly teach me the proper conduct."

爾時應教作是言：「我今出此諍事因緣，隨僧教勅我當奉行。」
They should be taught to say: "I will now explain the causes of this dispute, following the instructions of the Sangha I shall obey."

彼比丘若不隨僧語，復應語言：「汝若不受僧教者，我當僧中拔籌驅汝出眾。」
If the monk doesn’t comply, it should be said, "If you don’t accept the Sangha's teaching, then we will vote to expel you from the community."

是比丘若復不隨語者，爾時復應遣優婆塞問是比丘言：「汝當隨僧教不？
If the monk still doesn’t comply, send a lay follower to ask the monk, "Will you follow the Sangha's teaching?

若不隨者，我當與汝白衣法，驅汝出聚落城邑。」
If not, I will treat you as a layperson and expel you from the settlements and towns."

知是比丘所諍事，若是小小諍事者，僧即優婆塞前滅。
If it is known that the monk's issues are minor, the Sangha should resolve them before the lay followers.

若是鄙穢事，慰喻優婆塞令出已，僧如法如律如修多羅，隨其事實用現前毘尼除滅。
If it involves vile matters, reassure and guide the lay followers to leave, and then the Sangha should resolve it according to the Dhamma, Vinaya, and Sutta, using the immediate Vinaya to extinguish the matter.



爾時尊者阿難往到佛所，頭面禮足白世尊言：

At that time, the Venerable Ānanda went to the Buddha, bowed his head at the feet, and said to the Blessed One:

「所謂現前毘尼滅，云何名為現前毘尼滅？」

"What is meant by 'present Vinaya elimination'? What is it called 'present Vinaya elimination'?"

佛告阿難：

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

「比丘諍事，法非法、律非律、罪非罪、輕罪重罪、可治罪、不可治罪、法羯磨、非法羯磨、和合羯磨、不和合羯磨、應作不應作羯磨。

"When there are disputes among monks regarding what is lawful and unlawful, according to the Vinaya or not, guilt or innocence, minor or serious offenses, errors that can or cannot be remedied, lawful acts, unlawful acts, required or not required for harmony,

阿難！若有如是事起，應疾集僧。

Ānanda! If such matters arise, quickly gather the assembly.

疾集僧已檢校此事，如法如律如修多羅，隨其事實用現前毘尼除滅。

After the assembly has gathered, examine the matter following the rules and Vinaya as per the Sutras, and use the present Vinaya to eliminate it accordingly.

若成就五非法，不成與現前毘尼。

If the five unlawful aspects are present, it does not align with the present Vinaya.

何等五？

What are the five?

不現前與、不問、不受過、不如法、不和合與，是名五非法，不成與現前毘尼。

Not present, not inquired, not confessing mistakes, not lawful, not in harmony—these are the five unlawful aspects, not aligning with the present Vinaya.

若成就五如法，成與現前毘尼。

If the five lawful virtues are present, it aligns with the present Vinaya.

何等五？

What are the five?

現前與、問、受過、如法、和合與，是名五法成就與現前毘尼。

Present, inquired, confessing mistakes, lawful, in harmony—these are the five lawful aspects aligning with the present Vinaya.

如是阿難！如法如律如佛教，用現前毘尼滅諍事已，

Thus, Ānanda! According to the rules and Buddha's teaching, using the present Vinaya to resolve disputes,

若有客比丘、若去比丘、若與欲比丘、若見不欲比丘、

if there are visiting monks, departing monks, monks with or without desires,

若新受戒比丘、若在坐睡比丘，是諸比丘作是言：

newly ordained monks, or those sitting and sleeping, if any of these monks say:

『如是不好羯磨，別佛、別法、別僧，如牛羊僧，不善羯磨，羯磨不成就。』

'This is a bad act, separate from Buddha, separate from Dharma, separate from the Sangha, like cattle and sheep, not a good act, the act is not accomplished.'

阿難！如是更發起者，得波夜提罪，是名相言諍。」

Ānanda! If further disputes are caused in this manner, the offense of saṅghādisesa is incurred, and this is called verbal dispute."




以现前毘尼灭诽谤诸者，若比丘不见、不闻、不疑，比丘犯波罗夷、僧伽婆尸沙、波夜提、波罗提提舍尼、越毘尼，以是五篇罪谤，是名诽谤诸。

To dispel existing slanders against monks who do not see, hear, or suspect, if a monk commits the offenses of Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Parajika Tisodhaniya, or exceeds the Vinaya, these are called slanderous disputes.

用二毘尼灭，所谓忆念毘尼灭、不痴毘尼灭。

Two Vinayas are used for dispelling: the Vinaya of recollection and the Vinaya of non-delusion.

忆念毘尼者，佛住王舍城，慈地比丘尼作非梵行，遂便妊身。

Regarding the Vinaya of recollection, when Buddha resided in Rajagaha, Bhikkhuni Chia-Chih engaged in non-celibate actions and became pregnant.

到六群比丘所，作是言：「我作非梵行事，今者有娠。尊者与谁有嫌，我能谤之？」

She went to the Six Monks and said, "I have acted non-celibately and am now pregnant. Against which Venerable should I bring slanderous accusations?"

六群报言：「善哉姊妹！乃欲为我作饶益事。陀驃摩罗子是我生怨，與我破房舍及不好床蓐、麁惡飲食。若此人久在梵行者，我等长夜受苦。汝看此比丘斋日大众说法时在中者，汝当往彼众中以非梵行谤。」

The Six Monks replied, "Good, sister! You wish to benefit us. Dhara Pyamara is our lifelong enemy, breaking our houses and providing poor bedding and food. If this man stays in celibacy for long, we will suffer day and night. When you see this monk in the assembly during the Uposatha day, you should go among the assembly and accuse him of non-celibate actions."

答言：「当如尊者教。」

She replied, "I will do as the Venerable instructs."

是比丘尼若月八日、十四日、十五日大众说法时，往到众前而作是言：「尊者！为我办酥、油、粳米诸饮食，具修治房舍，并求佐产人，我产时至是。」

On the eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days of the month when the assembly preached, the Bhikkhuni went before the assembly and said, "Venerable! Prepare for me ghee, oil, rice, and other foods, repair the house, and find a midwife, as my time to give birth has arrived."

长老答言：「姊妹！汝自知之，我无此事。」

The elders replied, "Sister! You know yourself, there is no such thing with me."

比丘尼复言：「奇怪！奇怪！汝是丈夫，晨去夜来，共我从事，而今说言：『我无此事，勿复多言。』但当与我办酥油等，我今产时已至。」

The Bhikkhuni replied, "Strange! Strange! You are a man, come day and night to engage with me, and now you say, 'I have nothing to do with this.' Do not say more. Just prepare the ghee and oil for me, as my time to give birth is here."

长老复言：「姊妹！汝自知我无是事。」

The elder replied again, "Sister! You know that I have nothing to do with this matter."

如是三说而去，是时众中诸不信者，便作是念：「此等二人皆是年少，必有此事。」

After speaking thrice, she left, and those in the crowd who did not believe thought, "These two young people must indeed be involved in such affairs."

忠信之人，皆生疑惑，为有为无？

Faithful people arose in doubt, questioning whether this affair was true or false.

诸上信者便作是言：「此尊者已灭三毒、恶法永尽，无有此事。」

Those with stronger faith said, "This Venerable has extinguished the three poisons, his evil ways are eternally ended, there is no such affair."

尔时尊者陀驃摩罗子，作非梵行，恶名流布，屏处亦闻，众多亦闻，僧中亦闻。

At that time, the Venerable Dhara Pyamara was said to have engaged in non-celibate activities, and the bad reputation spread, heard in private, publicly, and even within the Sangha.

诸比丘以上因缘具白世尊。

Due to this reasoning, the monks reported the entire matter to the Buddha.

佛言：「比丘！是陀驃摩罗子非梵行事，恶名流布。汝等当於屏处三问，众多人中三问，僧中三问。」

The Buddha said, "Monks! Regarding this accusation of Dhara Pyamara’s non-celibate actions, which has caused a bad reputation to spread, you should question him three times in private, three times in public, and three times within the Sangha."

屏处问者，應作是问：「陀驃摩罗子长老！慈地比丘尼作是语，是事知不？」

In private questioning, you should ask: "Venerable Dhara Pyamara! Did Bhikkhuni Chia-Chih say this, and do you know if it is true or false?"

时长老言：「我不知作、不忆作。」

The elder replied, "I do not know or recall doing this."

如是第二、第三问。

The second and third questions were the same.

众多人中，三问亦如是。

The same three questions were asked among a large group of people.

众僧中问言：「陀驃摩罗子长老！慈地比丘尼作是言，是事知不？」

Within the assembly of monks, they asked, "Venerable Dhara Pyamara! Did Bhikkhuni Chia-Chih make such statements, and do you know if it is true?"

答言：「我不知作、不忆作。」

He replied, "I do not know or recall doing this."

第二、第三问亦如是。

The second and third questions were likewise.

诸比丘以是事，往白世尊：「长老陀驃摩罗子已屏处三问、多人中三问、僧中三问。自言：『我不知作、不忆作。』」

The monks then reported the matter to the Buddha: "Venerable Dhara Pyamara has been questioned three times in private, three times among many, and three times in the Sangha, and he says, 'I do not know or recall doing this.'"

佛告诸比丘：「此陀驃摩罗子清净无罪，是慈地比丘尼自言犯，应驱出。」

The Buddha said to the monks, "Dhara Pyamara is pure and without fault; it is Bhikkhuni Chia-Chih who claimed the offense and should be expelled."

时王舍城比丘尼嫌世尊，作如是言：「看是断事不平等，二人俱犯罪，云何置比丘，驱比丘尼？若俱有罪当俱出，若无罪当俱置。云何世尊驱一置一？」

Meanwhile, the Bhikkhunis in Rajagaha expressed dissatisfaction with the Buddha, saying, "This judgment is unfair. Both committed offenses; why is the monk retained and the Bhikkhuni expelled? If both are guilty, both should be expelled; if neither is guilty, both should remain. How does the Buddha expel one and not the other?"

诸比丘以是因缘具白世尊。

The monks reported this reasoning in full to the Buddha.

佛告阿难：「汝往呼王舍城比丘尼僧来。」

The Buddha instructed Ananda, "You should call the Bhikkhuni Sangha from Rajagaha to come."

「唯然世尊！」

"Yes, Venerable Lord!"

尔时阿难至比丘尼所，作是言：「诸姊妹！世尊呼汝等。」

Then Ananda went to where the Bhikkhunis were and said, "Sisters! The Buddha calls for all of you."

时比丘尼语尊者阿难言：「我于世尊所无有事缘，何故呼我？若有事缘不呼自往。尊者还去，我无缘事不能往。」

The Bhikkhuni said to Venerable Ananda, "I have no business with the Buddha, why does he call me? If I have business, I will go without being called. Venerable, return; I have no business and cannot go."

时阿难作是念：「此是奇异，蒙世尊恩，得出家为道。云何于佛不起敬心、不从教命？」

Ananda thought, "This is strange; accepting the Buddha's grace, they have become ordained. How do they not respect the Buddha's orders?"

尔时阿难还到世尊所，头面礼足，以是因缘具白世尊。

Then Ananda returned to the Buddha, bowed, and reported the entire situation.

佛告阿难：「汝往语王舍城比丘尼言：『汝有过，世尊勅汝令去，不得住此。』」

The Buddha said to Ananda, "You should tell the Bhikkhunis in Rajagaha: 'You have transgressed, and the Buddha orders you to leave; you may not stay here.'"

阿难受教，即往比丘尼所，作是言：「姊妹！汝有过，世尊勅汝令去，不得住此。」

Receiving these instructions, Ananda went to the Bhikkhuni and said, "Sisters! You have transgressed, the Buddha instructs you to leave; you may not stay here."

比丘尼答尊者阿难言：「我于城外无诸缘事不能去，若有缘者不勅自去。」

The Bhikkhuni answered Venerable Ananda, "I have no business outside the city and cannot leave; if I had business, I would go without being ordered."

尔时阿难作是念：「奇异！蒙世尊恩，得出家为道。云何于佛不生敬心？呼来不来，遣去不去。」

Ananda thought at this time, "Strange! Accepting the Buddha's grace, they have become ordained. How is it they have no respect for the Buddha, neither coming when called nor leaving when sent?"

阿难即还佛所，头面礼足，以是因缘具白世尊。

Ananda returned to the Buddha, bowed, and reported the situation.

佛语阿难：「如来、应供、正遍知，若于城邑聚落比丘、比丘尼僧，呼来不来，遣去不去者，如来自当避去。」

The Buddha said to Ananda, "The Tathagata, Arhat, and Perfectly Enlightened One, if monks or nuns in cities or villages are called and do not come or are sent and do not go, then the Tathagata should leave."

阿难！汝取我僧伽梨来。」

"Ananda! Fetch me my Sanghati robe."

时尊者阿难即授僧伽梨，世尊於中时不语比丘僧，唯将阿难经过五通居士聚落，向舍卫城。

Then Venerable Ananda presented the Sanghati robe, and the Buddha did not speak to the Bhikkhu Sangha at that time, but instead went with Ananda past the settlements of the Five Psychic Powers Householders towards Savatthi.




爾時韋提希子阿闍世王殺父王已，深懷愁毒，常日三詣世尊懺悔。
At that time, King Ajatashatru, son of Vaidehi, having killed his father, was filled with deep sorrow and remorse, and would visit the Blessed One three times a day to repent.

清旦、日中、晡時。
In the early morning, at noon, and in the evening.

晨朝懺悔已，中時復來，不見世尊，即問諸比丘世尊所在？
Having repented in the morning, he would come again at noon and, not seeing the Blessed One, would ask the monks where the Blessed One was.

諸比丘答言：「世尊已去。」
The monks replied, "The Blessed One has left."

王作是言：「世尊每行時一月、半月，常語我，今何因緣默然而去？」
The king said, "Whenever the Blessed One went on an alms round, whether for a month or half a month, he always spoke to me; why now has he left in silence?"

時諸比丘聞佛向所說，即答言：「大王！王舍城諸比丘尼不從世尊教命，呼來不來、遣去不去。
Hearing the Buddha's previous words, the monks replied, "Great King! The nuns in Rajagaha do not follow the orders of the Blessed One; when called, they do not come, when sent away, they do not go.

如是大王當知，如來、應供、正遍知，若於城邑聚落比丘、比丘尼僧，語來不來、遣去不去，如來便自避去。
Thus, Great King, you should know, the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Fully Enlightened One, when dealing with a monastic community in towns and villages, if they do not come when called or go when sent, the Tathagata will leave by himself.

今王舍城比丘尼僧不從佛教，是故世尊默然而去。」
Now, because the nuns of Rajagaha do not follow the Buddha's teaching, the Blessed One has left in silence."

王聞是語，極大瞋恚，勅語諸臣：「現我境內，諸比丘尼僧，一切驅出。」
Upon hearing these words, the king became very angry and commanded his ministers, "Expel all the nuns in my territory."

時有智臣即諫王言：「非境內諸比丘尼一切有過，但王舍城比丘尼違世尊教。」
At that time, a wise minister cautioned the king, "Not all the nuns in the territory have erred, only the nuns of Rajagaha have disobeyed the Blessed One's teachings."

王即用臣言，勅諸有司，驅王舍城比丘尼出。
The king accepted the minister's words and ordered the officials to expel the nuns of Rajagaha.

爾時諸司皆捉杖木、土塊、瓦石，打擲諸比丘尼，驅令出城，作是責言：「汝弊惡人！
At that time, the officials all took sticks, clods, and stones to beat and expel the nuns from the city, blaming them saying, "You vile people!

蒙世尊恩，得出家為道，而不恭敬，違背佛教。
You have received the Blessed One's grace to ordain and pursue the path, yet you are disrespectful and defy the Buddha's teachings.

速出去坐。
Hurry and leave at once.

汝弊惡老嫗，使我不見世尊、不聞正法，汝等速出不得住此。」
You vile old women, because of you, I cannot see the Blessed One or hear the true doctrine; you must leave quickly, you cannot remain here."

爾時里巷諸人見是事已，皆遙罵言：「乃至使我不見世尊、不聞正法，汝等速出不得住此。」
At that time, all the people in the village lanes who saw this cursed them from afar, saying, "Because of you, I cannot see the Blessed One or hear the true doctrine; you must leave quickly, you cannot remain here."

爾時優陀夷亦捉杖驅出諸比丘尼，呵責亦如上說。
Then Udayin also took a stick to drive out the nuns, scolding them as mentioned above.

王勅諸臣：「汝等觀比丘尼，若隨世尊後去者，汝等當為作法護，令得安隱。
The king commanded his ministers, "Observe the nuns; if they follow the Blessed One, provide them protection according to the law, so they may live in peace.

若向餘處去者，便隨其意，不須作護。」
If they go elsewhere, then let them be, no protection is needed."

時諸比丘尼出城已，各作是言：「若我等向餘方者，在在處處皆見驅逐，無得住處。
When the nuns left the city, each said, "If we go elsewhere, we will be driven out everywhere and have no place to stay.

我等今當隨世尊後去。」
We will now follow the Blessed One."

世尊朝所發處，諸比丘尼暮到。
The place the Blessed One departed from in the morning, the nuns reached by evening.

如是在道，恒降一日。
Thus, on the path, they always arrived in one day.




爾時世尊欲化度故，過五通居士聚落，向舍衛城。
At that time, the World-Honored One, in order to teach and transform, passed through the village of the Five Abilities Householders, heading towards Śrāvastī.

五通居士常法，聞比丘、比丘尼僧來，至一由延，迎設種種供養。
According to the usual practice of the Five Abilities Householders, upon hearing that the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs were coming within one yojana, they would set up various offerings to welcome them.

爾時五通居士聞此諸比丘尼來，即入正受觀之，諸比丘尼為何因緣故來？
At that time, the Five Abilities Householders heard that these bhikkhunīs were coming, so they entered correct perception to observe the reason for the bhikkhunīs' arrival.

觀已見彼諸比丘尼一切有過，皆被驅罰，未得解過，非是淨器，無聖法分。
Upon observing, they saw that all these bhikkhunīs had faults, were punished, had not resolved their faults, were not pure vessels, and had no share in the holy teachings.

作是觀已，都不往迎設諸供養。
Having observed this, they did not go to offer any hospitality or offerings.

諸比丘尼展轉借問，來至其門，語言：「王舍城諸比丘尼，今在門外，令居士知。」
The bhikkhunīs inquired among themselves and came to the door, saying, "The bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha are now outside; let the householder know."

居士即勅使人與破屋弊床褥，不供給煖水洗足及塗足油，亦不與非時漿，亦不問訊安慰，夜不然燈。
The householder instructed people to provide them with a broken house and worn-out bedding, no hot water for foot washing or foot oil, no non-time drinks, no greetings or comfort, and no lamps at night.

明旦復不供給齒木淨水，與麁飲食食已，遣令速去。
The next morning, they did not provide tooth wood or clean water, gave coarse food to eat, and ordered them to leave quickly.

諸比丘尼出外已，自相謂言：「我聞此居士常有信心，恭敬供養眾僧，如今觀之，無有信敬。」
After the bhikkhunīs left, they said to each other, "I heard that this householder usually has faith and respects and supports the sangha, but now it seems there is no faith or respect."

中有比丘尼謂諸人言：「止！止！阿姨！當自觀察，我等違世尊教，得此供給已自過分。」
Among them, a bhikkhunī said to the others, "Stop! Elder sisters! We should examine ourselves. We have transgressed the World-Honored One's teachings and received these provisions due to our own excesses."

諸比丘尼漸漸前行到舍衛城，詣阿難所，頭面禮足，却住一面，白阿難言：「我等欲見世尊禮覲問訊，願為比丘尼僧白世尊，唯哀聽許。」
The bhikkhunīs gradually proceeded to Śrāvastī, approached Ānanda, bowed with their heads at his feet, stood to one side, and said to Ānanda, "We wish to see the World-Honored One, to pay respects and inquire, and hope you will convey this to the World-Honored One for us."

阿難答言：「善哉諸姊！」即詣佛所，頭面禮足，却住一面，白佛言：「王舍城比丘尼僧，欲來奉覲世尊！聽者當命使前。」
Ānanda replied, "Very well, sisters!" He then went to the Buddha, bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet, stood to one side, and informed the Buddha, "The bhikkhunī sangha from Rājagṛha wishes to come to pay respects to the World-Honored One. If you permit, please send them forward."

佛告阿難：「汝莫令王舍城比丘尼僧來見我。」
The Buddha told Ānanda, "Do not allow the bhikkhunī sangha from Rājagṛha to come see me."

阿難言：「善哉！」禮佛即還，至比丘尼所告言：「諸姊！世尊有教，不聽汝前。」
Ānanda replied, "Very well," bowed to the Buddha, and returned to the bhikkhunīs, saying, "Sisters! The World-Honored One has instructed not to allow you to come forward."

第二、第三亦如是。
The second and third attempts were the same.

佛告阿難：「汝何故為王舍城比丘尼慇懃乃爾？」
The Buddha asked Ānanda, "Why are you so earnest for the bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha?"

阿難白佛言：「世尊！我不作比丘尼想。何以故？世尊呼來不來、遣去不去故。
Ānanda replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! I am not siding with the bhikkhunīs. Why? The World-Honored One calls them but they do not come, and sends them away but they do not go.

但世尊語有餘理，言王舍城比丘尼僧。以僧故，是故慇懃。」
However, the World-Honored One spoke of the bhikkhunī sangha from Rājagṛha, so because it concerns the sangha, I am earnest."

佛言：「聽王舍城比丘尼僧前。」
The Buddha said, "Permit the bhikkhunī sangha from Rājagṛha to come forward."

阿難即還比丘尼所，語言：「諸姊！大得善利，世尊聽汝等前。」
Ānanda then returned to the bhikkhunīs and said, "Sisters! Greatly fortunate! The World-Honored One allows you to come forward."

諸比丘尼聞已，皆稱：「善哉，善哉！阿難！」即前佛所，頭面禮足，却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！我等不善，如小兒愚癡，不識福田，不知恩養，不受世尊教。
Upon hearing this, the bhikkhunīs all exclaimed, "Excellent, excellent, Ānanda!" They proceeded to the Buddha, bowed with their heads at his feet, stood to one side, and said, "World-Honored One, we are unskillful, like foolish children, not recognizing the field of merit, not knowing how to be graciously supported, and not following the World-Honored One's teachings.

我今自知見罪，唯願世尊受我悔過。」
We now recognize our transgressions, and wish that the World-Honored One would accept our confession and repentance."

佛告王舍城比丘尼：「汝等不善，如小兒愚癡，不識福田，不知恩養。
The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha, "You are unskillful, like foolish children, not recognizing the field of merit, not knowing how to be graciously supported.

世尊呼來不來、遣去不去，汝今自見罪，聽汝悔過。於聖法中能悔過者，增長善根。自今已去勿復更作。」
You do not come when called by the World-Honored One, nor go when sent away. Now that you see your faults, I permit you to repent. Those who can repent within the holy teachings will grow their good roots. From now on, do not repeat such actions."

若比丘僧如法喚比丘尼僧，比丘尼僧法應即來。
If a bhikkhu sangha lawfully calls the bhikkhunī sangha, the bhikkhunī sangha should rightfully come.

若不來者，得越毘尼罪。
If they do not come, they incur a transgression of the Vinaya.

比丘僧應遮此比丘尼僧布薩自恣，若來時不聽入門。
The bhikkhu sangha should prevent this bhikkhunī sangha from participating in the Uposatha and Pravarana. If they do come, they should not be allowed to enter.

若比丘僧如法喚眾多比丘尼、呼一比丘尼亦如是。
If a bhikkhu sangha lawfully calls many bhikkhunīs or a single bhikkhunī, the same rules apply.

若眾多比丘如法喚，比丘尼僧法應即來。
If many bhikkhus lawfully call, the bhikkhunī sangha should rightfully come.

若不來者，得越毘尼罪。
If they do not come, they incur a transgression of the Vinaya.

應遮此比丘尼布薩、自恣，若來時不聽入門。
They should be prevented from participating in the Uposatha and Pravarana. If they come, they should not be allowed to enter.

若眾多比丘如法喚眾多比丘尼、喚一比丘尼亦如是。
If many bhikkhus lawfully call many bhikkhunīs or a single bhikkhunī, the same rules apply.

若一比丘如法喚比丘尼僧、喚眾多比丘尼、喚一比丘尼，比丘尼法應即來，若不來者，得越毘尼罪。
If a single bhikkhu lawfully calls the bhikkhunī sangha or many bhikkhunīs or a single bhikkhunī, the bhikkhunīs should rightfully come. If they do not, they incur a transgression of the Vinaya.

應遮此比丘尼布薩、自恣，若來時不聽入門。
They should be prevented from participating in the Uposatha and Pravarana. If they come, they should not be allowed to enter.

若尼僧、若眾多比丘尼、若一比丘尼，向比丘僧、向眾多比丘、向一比丘悔過法，如前向佛悔過法中廣說。
Whether it is the bhikkhunī sangha, many bhikkhunīs, or a single bhikkhunī, facing the bhikkhu sangha, many bhikkhus, or a single bhikkhu, the confession and repentance are as extensively stated before in the repentance practices towards the Buddha.

爾時世尊為王舍城比丘尼隨順說法，示教利喜。
At that time, the World-Honored One taught the bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha in accordance with their capacity, guiding and delighting them with teachings.

時一比丘尼得法眼淨，佛告諸比丘尼：「汝等可去，還案來時道，若五通居士若有所說，汝當受行。」
Then, one bhikkhunī attained the pure Dharma Eye. The Buddha told the bhikkhunīs, "You may go, retracing the path you came by. If the Five Abilities Householders have anything to say, you should accept and practice it."

爾時王舍城諸比丘尼，即還趣五通聚落。
At that time, the bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha returned to the village of the Five Abilities Householders.

時五通居士即入定，觀見此諸比丘尼已向佛懺悔，悉皆清淨，成就法器。
Then, the Five Abilities Householders entered meditation, observed that these bhikkhunīs had already confessed and repented to the Buddha, and were all pure and accomplished.

時五通居士案如常法，乘白騲馬車一由延迎，遙見諸比丘尼僧，便下車步進，褊袒右肩右膝著地，合掌白言：「善來阿姨！行道不疲極耶？」
The Five Abilities Householders, according to regular practice, rode a white horse-drawn carriage to meet them one yojana away. Upon seeing the bhikkhunī sangha in the distance, they got off the carriage, walked forward, uncovered their right shoulder, knelt on their right knee, and said, "Well come, venerable sisters! Are you not weary from the journey?"

居士即請諸比丘尼在前行、從後而歸。
The householder invited the bhikkhunīs to walk ahead while they followed back home.

到家中已，與好新房、床褥、臥具，與煖水洗足與塗足油、與非時漿、暮然燈火安慰問訊言：「阿姨！安隱住。」
Upon reaching home, they offered a fine new room, beds, bedding, hot water for foot washing, foot oil, non-time drinks, and evening lamps for comfort, saying, "Venerable sisters! Stay safely."

明旦供給齒木澡水，與種種粥，至時與隨適飲食。
The next morning, they provided tooth wood, bathing water, various porridge, and timely meals and drinks.

食已偏袒右肩右膝著地，合掌白言：「我今請阿姨夏安居，我當供給所須衣食、床臥、病瘦醫藥，當教學受誦經偈，唯除布薩自恣。」
After the meal, they uncovered their right shoulder, knelt on their right knee, and said, "I now invite the venerable sisters to stay for the rains retreat. I will provide the necessary clothes, food, bedding, and medicines for illness, and teach recitation of sutras and verses, only excluding the Uposatha and Pravarana."

爾時諸比丘尼作是念：「今已四月十二日夏坐已逼，又世尊復勅當受五通居士語。」 
At that time, the bhikkhunīs thought, "It is now already the twelfth day of the fourth month and the rains retreat is approaching. Moreover, the World-Honored One has instructed us to accept the words of the Five Abilities Householders."

思惟是已，即便受請夏安居。
Reflecting on this, they accepted the invitation to stay for the rains retreat.

居士日日為比丘尼說四念處，諸比丘尼聞此法已，初夜後夜精勤不懈，修習聖道，成就得證。
The householder taught the Four Foundations of Mindfulness daily to the bhikkhunīs, and upon hearing this teaching, the bhikkhunīs strove diligently day and night, practicing the holy path, and achieving realization.

諸比丘尼受自恣竟：「我等當詣世尊，禮敬問訊，自說果證。」
Upon completing the Pravarana, the bhikkhunīs said, "We should go to see the World-Honored One, to pay respects and inquire, and to report our realization."

時諸比丘尼向舍衛城，到阿難所，頭面禮足，却住一面，白尊者阿難言：「如來、應供、正遍知，為諸聲聞說四念處，我等初夜、後夜精進不懈，修習聖道成就得證。」
The bhikkhunīs then headed towards Śrāvastī, approached Ānanda, bowed with their heads at his feet, stood to one side, and said to the Venerable Ānanda, "The Tathāgata, Worthy of Offerings, Perfectly Enlightened One, has taught the Four Foundations of Mindfulness to the disciples. We have diligently practiced without rest day and night, cultivating the holy path and achieving realization."

作是語已，便還所住。
Having said this, they returned to their residence.

諸比丘尼眾去不久，時尊者阿難詣世尊所，頭面禮足，却住一面，以王舍城諸比丘尼所說，具白世尊，乃至修道得證。
Not long after the bhikkhunīs left, the Venerable Ānanda went to the World-Honored One, bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet, stood to one side, and reported everything said by the bhikkhunīs from Rājagṛha, including their achievement on the path.

尊者阿難說是語已，復白佛言：「是事云何？唯願解說。」
After Ānanda said this, he further asked the Buddha, "What is this matter? May you kindly explain."

佛告阿難：「如諸比丘尼所說真實無異。
The Buddha told Ānanda, "What the bhikkhunīs said is true and without discrepancy.

何以故？若比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷，其有能於四念處精勤修習，一切皆得成就得證，如《四念處經》中廣說。」
Why? Because if bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, laymen, or laywomen can diligently practice the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, they will all achieve realization, as extensively explained in the Sutra on the Four Foundations of Mindfulness.




時諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！有何因緣王舍城比丘尼於世尊不識恩分？

At that time, the monks said to the Buddha, "World-honored One! What is the reason for the Bhikshuni from Rajagriha not recognizing the favor of the World-honored One?

來舍衛城詣阿難所，不覲世尊，使優陀夷捉杖驅逐。

She came to Shravasti to meet Ananda, but did not visit the World-honored One, and had Udayi drive her away with a stick.

尊者阿難慇懃請救，唯願解說。」

The venerable Ananda earnestly sought to save her, I wish you would please explain."

佛告諸比丘：「此諸比丘尼不但今日於我不識恩分，優陀夷捉杖驅逐，阿難慇懃請救。

The Buddha told the monks: "Not only today does this Bhikshuni fail to recognize my kindness, leading to Udayi expelling her with a stick and Ananda earnestly pleading for her.

過去世時已曾如是，如《象王本生經》中廣說。」

In past lives, it has also been so, as broadly explained in the 'Birth Story of the Elephant King.'  



摩訶僧祇律卷第十二
Mahasanghika Vinaya, Scroll Twelve




