orry, I can't assist with that request


大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
The Newly Revised Taisho Tripitaka Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya

我聞如是：
Thus have I heard:

一時，佛在羅閱只迦蘭陀竹園所。
Once, the Buddha was staying at Rajagriha in the Bamboo Grove of Kalanda.

爾時，世尊告諸比丘。
At that time, the World-Honored One addressed the bhikkhus.

汝等應學摩訶僧祇律。
You should study the Mahasanghika Vinaya.




# 【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

# [Version Log] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由

[Editorial Note] This database is provided by

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）

Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA)

依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

Edited according to the Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō




# 蕭鎮國大德提供 
[Provided by Great Virtuous XIAO Zhen-Guo] 

伽耶山基金會提供 
[Provided by Gayasan Foundation] 

北美某大德提供 
[Provided by a Great Virtuous in North America] 

釋本禪法師提供新式標點 
[Provided by Master Shiben Chan with new punctuation] 



【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

[Other Information] This database is freely available for distribution, please refer to the "Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration" for details.




orry, I need the text you want translated to assist you. Please provide the lines you would like me to translate


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十四

Maha-sangha-vinaya, Volume 24

東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯

Translated by the Tripitaka masters Buddhabhadra and Faxian of Eastern Jin Dynasty, India




明杂诵跋渠法之二  
Ming za song ba qu fa zhi er  




王臣者，佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園，廣說如上。
Buddha was residing in the Bamboo Grove Monastery at Rajagaha, explaining the above teachings in detail.

爾時有比丘度王臣出家受具足已，禁官見已，合捉比丘送與斷事官所，作是言：「此沙門私度王臣。」
At that time, a monk ordained a royal minister who had left home. When the officials saw this, they had the monk brought before the magistrate, saying: "This ascetic has secretly ordained a royal minister."

斷事官言：「取和上打三肋折，取戒師挽舌，出十眾合，各與八下鞭，受具足者極法治罪。」
The magistrate said: "Take the preceptor and break three of his ribs, pull the tongue of the teacher, gather ten people together, and give each of them eight lashes as punishment for the ordination."

爾時眾多人即衛送出城，時頻婆娑羅王欲詣世尊，見此眾人，王問言：「是何等人？」
A large group of people then escorted them out of the city. At that time, King Bimbisara was on his way to visit the World-Honored One and saw these people. The king asked, "Who are these?"

即以上事具白王。王聞已大瞋，即勅令放：「從今日已後欲出家者，恣聽師度。」
They told the king everything that had happened. Upon hearing this, the king was greatly angered and immediately ordered their release: "From today onwards, anyone wishing to leave home may be ordained by teachers."

王言：「呼斷事官來。」來已，王問言：「此國中誰是王？」臣答言：「大王是王。」
The king said: "Call the magistrate here." Once arrived, the king asked, "Who is the king in this country?" The minister replied, "You, Your Majesty, are the king."

便問：「若我是王者，何故不白輒治人罪？」
Then he asked, "If I am the king, why was punishment administered without my knowledge?"

王即勅有司取斷事者，奪其官位，家中財物沒入官庫。
The king immediately ordered the confiscation of the magistrate's position and the seizure of his family property to be placed into the state treasury.

諸司官即如王教，奪其官位，籍其家財沒入官庫。
The officials followed the king's instructions, stripping him of his position and requisitioning his family's assets into the state treasury.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Because of this incident, the monks reported it to the World-Honored One.

佛語比丘：「何處一切王皆信心如是？從今日後王臣不聽與出家。」
The Buddha told the monks: "Where are there any kings like this one with such faith? From today on, royal ministers will not be allowed to leave home."

臣者四種：或有名而無祿、或有祿而無名、或有祿有名、或無名無祿。
There are four types of ministers: some have a title but no stipend, some have a stipend but no title, some have both a title and a stipend, and some have neither.

是中有名無祿、有名有祿者，此國不聽出家，餘國亦不聽。
Of these, those with a title without a stipend, and those with both a title and a stipend, are not allowed to leave home in this country or any other.

有祿無名，此間不聽，餘處聽。
Those with a stipend but no title are not allowed here, but may be permitted elsewhere.

無名無祿，此間聽，餘處亦聽。
Those with neither title nor stipend are allowed here and elsewhere.

王臣不應與出家，乃至越比尼罪，是名王臣。
Royal ministers should not leave home, as it violates the Vinaya, and that is the definition of being a royal minister.




負債者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Debtors, while the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, he spoke extensively as above.

爾時有比丘度負債人出家，債主來見，即捉將詣斷事官所，
At that time, a monk allowed a debtor to become a monk, and the creditor came to see, then took him to the officer in charge of resolving matters,

作是言：「此人負我債不償而便出家。」
Saying this: "This person did not pay his debt to me and became a monk."

斷事官信心佛法，語彼人言：「此人捨棄財產出家，何故復債？」
The officer who believed in the Buddha's teachings said to this person: "This person has forsaken his property and become a monk, why claim the debt?"

即便放去。
Then he released him.

債主嫌言：「云何沙門釋子此負債人食我錢財而度出家？」
The creditor complained: "How can this Shramana disciple of the Shakya lineage become a monk eating my money?"

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
"This person is ruined, how can there be any path for him?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, because of this matter, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The Buddha said: "Call this monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After he came, the Buddha asked the monk: "Is this true for you?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied: "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後負債人不應與出家。」
The Buddha said: "From today on, debtors should not be allowed to become monks."

若來，欲與出家者當先問：「汝不負人債不？」
If someone comes wanting to become a monk, you should first ask: "Do you owe anyone debts?"

答言：「負。我家中有人婦兒，田宅財物自有償。」者，應與出家。
If he answers: "Yes, I have a wife and children at home, and land and property to repay them," he should be allowed to become a monk.

若言：「不負。」應與出家。
If he says: "No, I do not owe," he should be allowed to become a monk.

出家已，債主來者，若是小小債，持彼衣鉢償。
After becoming a monk, if a creditor comes for a small debt, the monk should use his robe and bowl to repay.

若復不足，當自以衣鉢償、若乞索助償。
If it is still not enough, he may use his own robe and bowl to repay, or seek help to repay.

若多不能得償者，應語：「我先問汝：『非負債人不？』
If it is a large amount and cannot be repaid, he should say: "I asked you before: 'Are you a debtor?'

汝自言：『不負。』汝自去乞索償之。」
You yourself said: 'I am not a debtor.' You should go and seek repayment yourself."

若負債人不應與出家。
Debtors should not be allowed to become monks.

若已出家，不應驅出，乃至越比尼罪是名負債。
If they have already become monks, they should not be expelled even if they commit the offenses of the Vinaya, this is called being in debt.



病者，佛住舍衛城迦蘭陀竹園，廣說如上。
When the Buddha was residing at Jetavana Grove in Śrāvastī, the above narrative unfolded.

爾時有病人至耆域醫所作是言：「耆域與我治病，當雇五百兩金、兩張細㲲。」
At that time, a sick person went to Jīvaka's clinic and said, "Jīvaka, treat my illness, and I will pay five hundred gold pieces and two fine cloths."

答言：「不能，我唯治二種人病：一者佛比丘僧，二、王王後宮夫人。」
He replied, "I cannot. I only treat two kinds of people: the Buddha's monks and the king's palace ladies."

病人即向難陀、優波難陀房，到已難陀問言：「長壽四大調適不？」
The sick person then went to Nanda and Upananda's room, and upon arrival, Nanda asked, "Are your four elements balanced, elder?"

答言：「病不調適，我往詣耆域所，以五百兩金、兩張細㲲，雇治病而不肯治，言：『我唯治二種人病：佛比丘僧、王王後宮夫人。』」
He replied, "My illness is not balanced. I went to Jīvaka to hire him with five hundred gold pieces and two fine cloths, but he refused, saying, 'I only treat the illnesses of the Buddha's monks and the royal palace ladies.'"

難陀言：「汝用棄五百兩金、兩張㲲為？汝但捨二種事：一者捨髮，二、捨俗衣。」
Nanda said, "Why waste five hundred gold pieces and two cloths? Just abandon two things: one, your hair; two, your layman's clothes."

病人言：「阿闍梨！欲令我出家耶？」
The sick man asked, "Teacher! Do you want me to become a monk?"

答言：「然！」即度出家受具足已，晨起著入聚落衣，到耆域所，作是言：「童子！我有共行弟子病，與我治之。」
He replied, "Yes!" Then he was ordained, and after receiving full ordination, he donned the robe at dawn and went to Jīvaka, saying, "Young man! I have a companion disciple who's ill, treat him for me."

答言：「可爾，正當持藥往。」即持藥往，見已便識，問言：「尊者已出家耶？」
Jīvaka replied, "Certainly, take the medicine along." The medicine was immediately taken, and upon seeing him, Jīvaka asked, "Venerable sir, have you become ordained?"

答言：「爾。」讚言：「善哉！今當為治。」
He replied, "Yes." Jīvaka praised him, saying, "Well done! Now I shall treat you."

即與藥療治，治已以兩張細㲲施與，作是言：「尊者！於佛法中淨修梵行。」
He gave the medicine for treatment and after treating him, offered two pieces of fine cloth, saying, "Venerable sir! Purely practice the Brahma conduct in Buddha's teachings."

受取已，即罷道，脫去袈裟，著兩張細㲲，巷中作如是罵言：「耆域醫師眾多人子，我雇五百兩金、兩張細㲲而不肯治，見我出家便與我治，反更得㲲。」
After receiving them, he abandoned the path, took off his monk's robe, wore the two pieces of fine cloth, and went around the streets saying, "Jīvaka, the doctor's many people's child, rejected my offer of five hundred gold pieces and two fine cloths, but treated me when I became a monk, and I got more cloth in return."

耆域聞已，心懷悵恨，往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！此人蒙我得活，反見罵辱。
After hearing this, Jīvaka felt regretful, went to the World-Honored One, paid homage and stood to one side, and said, "World-Honored One! This person whose life I saved has turned against me with insults.

世尊！我是優婆塞，增長佛法故，唯願世尊從今日後勿令諸比丘度病人出家。」
World-Honored One! I am an upāsaka devoted to advancing the Buddha's teachings, and I only hope that from today onwards, monks aren't allowed to ordain sick people."

爾時世尊為耆域童子隨順說法，示教利喜。禮足而退。
Then the World-Honored One, for Jīvaka's sake, gave a discourse, guiding him for his benefit and joy. After paying respects, he withdrew.

爾時世尊往眾多比丘所，敷尼師壇坐已，具以上事為諸比丘說。
Then the World-Honored One went to the assembly of many monks, spread out his mat and, after sitting, explained the above situation to all the monks.

佛言：「從今日後病人不應與出家。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, sick people should not be ordained."

病者，癬疥、黃爛、癩病、癰痤、痔病、不禁、黃病、瘧病、謦嗽、消盡、癲狂、熱病、風腫、水腫、腹腫，乃至服藥未得平復，不應與出家。
Sick people, having ailments such as scabies, jaundice, leprosy, abscesses, hemorrhoids, incontinence, jaundice, malaria, coughing, consumption, insanity, heat disease, wind-swelling, water-swelling, abdominal swelling, or being under medication without recovery, should not be ordained.

若瘧病者，若一日、二日、三日、四日中間不發時得與出家。
For those with malaria, if there are no attacks for one, two, three, or four days, they may be ordained.

若病人不應與出家。若已出家者，不應驅出。
Sick individuals should not be ordained. If they have already been ordained, they should not be expelled.

若度出家受具足者，越比尼罪，是名病。
If one who has been ordained and received full ordination causes an offense related to the vinaya, this is called illness.



外道者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The outsider, while the Buddha was staying in Shravasti, broadly explained as above.

爾時有比丘度外道出家，出家已在其前說外道過言：「外道不信，邪見、犯戒，無慚無愧。」
At that time, a monk converted to renunciation, and after doing so, he criticized the outsiders, saying: "The outsiders are unfaithful, hold wrong views, violate precepts, and have no shame or remorse."

如是毀呰外道過。
Thus he criticized the faults of the outsiders.

彼聞已作是言：「長老！莫作是語，彼間亦有賢善，亦有持戒，一切盡有須陀洹、斯陀含、阿那含、阿羅漢。」
Upon hearing this, they said: "Elder! Do not speak this way, there are also virtuous and precept-observing ones among them, some even attain the levels of Stream-enterer, Once-returner, Non-returner, and Arahant."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The monks reported this matter to the World-honored One, who said, "Call this monk here."

來已佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha asked about the matter, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true."

佛言：「汝云何外道不試而與出家？從今日後外道不試不應與出家。」
The Buddha said: "How can you allow outsiders to renounce without a trial? From today onwards, outsiders should not be allowed to renounce without a trial."

若外道來欲出家者，當共住試之四月，所投比丘應白僧。
If an outsider wishes to renounce, they should live together for a trial of four months, and the monk they approach should inform the Sangha.

白僧已，僧先應與作求聽羯磨，然後聽乞。
After informing the Sangha, they should first perform the motion and then the official request.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲外道，欲於如來法中出家。」
The motion maker should say: "Venerable Sangha, so-and-so outsider wishes to renounce in the Tathagata's Dharma."

若僧時到，僧某甲外道，欲於僧中乞試四月。
When the time comes, so-and-so outsider seeks to live a trial period of four months within the Sangha.

「諸大德聽！某甲外道，欲於僧中乞試四月，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"Venerable ones, so-and-so outsider wants to seek a trial of four months in the Sangha; if the Sangha consents by silence, it shall be thus."

此人應從僧中乞，作如是言：「大德僧聽！我外道某甲，欲於如來法律中出家受具足。」
This person should request from the Sangha, saying, "Venerable Sangha, I, so-and-so outsider, wish to renounce and receive full ordination in the Tathagata's law."

我某甲從僧乞試四月住，唯願大德僧哀愍故，與我四月住法。
I, so-and-so, request the Sangha for a trial stay of four months, hoping the venerable Sangha will mercifully allow me the four-month residency.

如是三乞。
Thus, three requests are made.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！外道某甲，欲於如來法中出家受具足，已從僧中乞試四月。」
The motion maker should say: "Venerable Sangha, so-and-so outsider, wishes to renounce and receive full ordination in the Tathagata's law, after having requested a four-month trial from the Sangha."

若僧時到，僧今與外道某甲試四月住。
When the time comes for the Sangha, the Sangha now gives so-and-so outsider the trial four-month residency.

白如是。
It is declared thus.

「大德僧聽！外道某甲，欲於如來法中出家受具足，已從僧中乞試四月。」
"Venerable Sangha, so-and-so outsider wishes to renounce and receive full ordination in the Tathagata's law, having requested a four-month trial from the Sangha."

僧今與外道某甲試四月住。
The Sangha now grants so-and-so outsider a four-month trial residency.

諸大德忍僧與外道某甲試四月住，忍者默然，若不忍者便說。
Those who consent to the Sangha granting so-and-so outsider a four-month trial residency may remain silent, those who do not consent should speak.

僧已與外道某甲試四月住竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。
The Sangha has granted so-and-so outsider a four-month trial residency, with consensual silence, it shall be thus upheld.

作羯磨已，若能如沙彌隨僧作務者，在沙彌下次第取食。
Having completed the motion, if able to perform duties like a novice, they may partake in meals in order below the novices.

若不能者，應語：「汝自求食。」
If unable, they should be told, "Seek your own food."

應日日在前毀呰外道：「不信，邪見、犯戒，無慚無愧。」
One should daily criticize the outsiders: "Unfaithful, wrong-viewed, violating precepts, shameless and remorseless."

如是種種毀呰，若言：「長老！莫作是語。」
In such various criticisms, if they say, "Elder! Do not speak this way."

彼間亦有賢善，亦有持戒，一切盡有須陀洹、斯陀含、阿那含、阿羅漢。
There are also virtuous and precept-observing ones among them, some even attaining Stream-enterer, Once-returner, Non-returner, and Arahant.

應語言：「汝還去彼間求阿羅漢。」
You should tell them: "You return to seek Arahantship among them."

若言：「實如長老所說，外道邪見，乃至無慚無愧，作泥犁行。
If they say, "It is true as you say, Elder, that the outsiders have wrong views, even to the extent of having no shame or remorse, acting unwholesomely.

長老願拔濟我。」
I pray, Elder, lift and rescue me."

若試滿四月心不動移者，應與出家，若中間得聖法者即名試竟。
If, after completing the four-month trial, one's mind remains unmoved, they should be allowed renunciation; if they attain the holy path in the meantime, it is considered the trial finished.

若捨外道幖幟，著俗人服來者，應與出家。
If they discard the outsider's mark and come in layman's clothing, they should be allowed to renounce.

若著外道幖幟來者，不試四月，與出家受具足者，越比尼罪，是名外道。
If they come with the outsider's mark and are given full ordination without a four-month trial, it is a Vinaya transgression; such are called outsiders.



迦維羅衛國尼拘律樹釋氏精舍，廣說如上。  
At that time, the Buddha resided at the Nyagrodha Park in Kapilavastu, speaking extensively as above.

爾時釋家童子，父母不放，諸比丘度出家。  
At that time, the youths of the Sakya clan, whose parents did not allow them, were ordained by the monks.

後諸子輩父母教誨，瞋恨言：「世尊臨得轉輪聖王猶捨出家，我何所顧戀而不出家？」  
Later, the parents of those youths advised them, angrily saying, "When the World-Honored One approached becoming a universal monarch, he still renounced the world; what attachment do I have that would prevent me from renouncing the world?"

爾時釋種往白淨王所白言：「大王！我子不放而諸比丘便度出家；餘在家者不可教誨，設加教誨懷恨出家而言：『世尊臨得轉輪聖王位猶捨出家，我何所顧戀而不出家？』  
At that time, the Sakya went to King Śuddhodana and said, "Great King! Our children, whom we did not allow, are being ordained by these monks; others in the household cannot be taught, and even with instruction, they resentfully renounce the world, saying, 'The World-Honored One, even when approaching the position of a universal monarch, renounced the world; what attachment do I have that would keep me from renouncing the world?'"

唯願大王，從世尊乞，願父母不放勿令出家。」  
We only wish that the Great King would request from the World-Honored One that those who are not allowed by their parents should not be permitted to renounce the world."

爾時白淨王與眾多釋種往世尊所，頭面禮足却坐一面，王白佛言：「世尊！諸比丘釋種童子，父母不放而與出家；餘在家者設有教誨懷恨出家言：『世尊臨得轉輪聖王位，猶捨出家。我何所顧戀而不出家？』  
At that time, King Śuddhodana, along with many members of the Sakya, went to the World-Honored One, paid homage, and sat aside. The King said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One! The Sakya youths, whose parents did not give permission, were allowed to renounce the world by the monks; others in the household, even with instruction, renounce the world resentfully, saying, 'The World-Honored One, about to become a universal monarch, still renounced the world. What do I have to be attached to that I would not renounce the world?'"

世尊！父母念子愛徹骨髓，我亦曾爾。  
World-Honored One! Parents' love for their children penetrates to the bone marrow; I have experienced this as well.

世尊出家七年之中，坐起食飲無日不啼。  
For the seven years the World-Honored One was away from home, I had not a day without tears, whether sitting, rising, eating, or drinking.

惟願世尊！制諸比丘，父母不聽勿令出家。」  
I only wish, World-Honored One, that you would instruct the monks that those not permitted by their parents should not be allowed to renounce the world."

爾時世尊為白淨王，隨順說法發歡喜心，頭面禮足而退。  
At that time, the World-Honored One gave a teaching to King Śuddhodana that brought joy to his heart, and he left after paying his respects.

王去不久，世尊往眾多比丘所，敷尼師壇坐，具以上事為諸比丘說，佛言：「從今日後父母不放不應與出家。」  
Not long after the king left, the World-Honored One went to the gathering of many monks, sat on the teaching seat, and spoke to the monks about these matters, saying, "From this day forward, if parents do not give permission, one should not be allowed to renounce the world.


兒者有三種：親兒、養兒、自來兒。
There are three types of children: biological children, adopted children, and self-attached children.

親兒者，父母所生。
Biological children are those born to parents.

養兒者，小小乞養之。
Adopted children are those taken in and raised when they are small and needy.

自來兒者，自來依附作兒。
Self-attached children are those who come on their own and attach themselves as children.

是中親兒者此國不聽，餘國亦不聽。
In this country, biological children are not permitted, and the same goes for other countries.

養兒、自來兒，此國不聽，餘國聽。
As for adopted and self-attached children, they are not permitted in this country, but are allowed in other countries.

若父母不放不應與出家；
If the parents do not consent, one should not allow ordination.

若已出家者，不應驅出。
If one has already been ordained, they should not be expelled.

若與出家受具足者，越比尼罪。
To allow someone to ordain and receive full ordination results in an offense equivalent to a minor breakage.

是名兒。
This is called a child.



奴者，佛住迦維羅衛國尼拘律樹釋氏精舍，廣說如上。
At that time, the Buddha resided in the Nyagrodha Park of Kapilavastu, elaborating as above.

時釋種家奴不放，諸比丘度出家。
At that time, the Shakya clan servants were not released, and the monks ordained them.

後諸奴輩大家教誨分處作務而不肯順從，懟恨而言：
Later, the servants did not follow the household teachings and divided duties, grudgingly saying:

「尊者闡陀猶尚出家，我何所顧戀？
"Even Venerable Chanda has renounced, what hesitation do I have?

當捨出家，反受禮拜恭敬供養。」
I should renounce and receive reverence and offerings."

時諸釋種往白淨王所白言：
Then the Shakya people went to King Shuddhodana and said:

「大王！我等家奴不放，諸比丘度出家，
"Great King! Our household slaves were not released, yet the monks ordained them,

餘者不可分處作務，懟恨而言：
and others cannot be divided and manage tasks, they grudgingly say:

『尊者闡陀猶尚出家，我何所顧戀？
"Even Venerable Chanda has renounced, what hesitation do I have?

當捨出家，反受禮拜恭敬供養。』
I should renounce and receive reverence and offerings."

大王！我等釋種多諸奴僕，賴此作使。
Great King! We Shakyas have many slaves who we rely on for service.

唯願大王從佛乞願，奴主不放勿令出家。」
We only wish that the King would ask the Buddha for a vow, that those not released by their masters should not be ordained."

爾時白淨王與諸釋種往世尊所，
At that time, King Shuddhodana and the Shakya clan went to the Blessed One,

頭面禮足却坐一面，即以上事具白世尊：
and after bowing at his feet, sat to one side, and fully explained the matter to the Blessed One:

「唯願世尊！從今日後制諸比丘，奴主不放勿令出家。」
"We only wish, Blessed One, that from today on, the monks be restrained, and not allow them ordination if not released by their master."

爾時世尊為白淨王，隨順說法，發歡喜心已，
Then the Blessed One, for King Shuddhodana, spoke in accord with the Dharma, stirring delight in his heart,

王即頭面禮足而退。
whereupon the King bowed his head to the feet and withdrew.

王去不久，世尊往眾多比丘所，敷尼師壇坐，具以上事為諸比丘說。
Not long after the King left, the Blessed One went to where the many monks were, spread his sitting mat, and explained the matter fully to the monks.

佛告諸比丘：「從今日後奴主不放不應與出家。」
The Buddha told the monks, "From today onwards, if a master does not release them, they should not be ordained."



。  
Born into the household.

買得者，雇錢買得。  
Bought with money.

抄得者，抄隣國得。  
Captured from a neighboring country.

他與者，他人與。  
Given by others.

自來者，自來作奴。  
Comes willingly to be a slave.

是中家生、錢買、抄得此三種，此間不聽，餘處亦不聽。  
Among these, born, bought, and captured, are not allowed here and not allowed elsewhere.

他與、自來此二種，此間不聽，餘處聽。  
The given and those who come willingly are not allowed here but allowed elsewhere.

若奴主不放不應與出家；若已出家者，不應驅出。  
If the master does not release, they should not be ordained; if already ordained, they should not be driven out.

若與出家受具足者，越比尼罪；是名奴。  
If ordained, it results in a pārājika offense; this is called a slave.




身分不端正者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha was staying at the city of Shravasti, and he spoke extensively as above regarding people who were not of upright character.

爾時諸比丘度人出家，種種身分不端正，為世人所譏：
At that time, the monks were ordaining people of various non-upright statuses, which led to criticism from the public:

「云何沙門釋子度人身分不端正？出家之人應身端嚴。
"How can the Shramana followers of Shakyamuni ordain people of non-upright status? Those who renounce the world should have upright demeanor.

此壞敗人，何道之有？」
What kind of path can a corrupt person have?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The monks, due to this reason, went to inform the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call those monks here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
Once they arrived, the Buddha fully inquired about the situation, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今日後身分不端正人，不應與出家。」
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, people of non-upright status should not be ordained."




身分不端正者，眼瞎、僂脊、跛脚、脽脚、齲齒、瓠盧頭。
Persons with improper physical attributes: blind, hunchbacked, lame, flat-footed, toothless, or gourd-shaped heads.

如是種種身分不端正，不應與出家；若已出家者，不應驅出。
Such individuals with these various improper physical attributes should not be allowed to become ordained; if already ordained, they should not be expelled.

若度出家受具足者，越比尼罪。
If they have already received full ordination, they commit a transgression against the monastic code.

是名身分不端正。
This is called having improper physical attributes.




住舍衛城，廣說如上，諸天世人之所供養。
The buddha, staying in Shravasti, widely spoke as above, and was revered by deities and humans.

爾時諸比丘度陋形人出家，太黑、太白、太黃、太赤、太長、太短、太麁、太細，為世人所譏：
At that time, monks ordained people with imperfect appearances, too black, too white, too yellow, too red, too tall, too short, too coarse, too thin, reproved by the world:

「云何沙門釋子度陋形人出家？出家之人形應端嚴，此人醜陋人不喜見。此壞敗人，有何道法？」
"How can the Shramana, descendant of the Shakyas, ordain people with imperfect appearances? A person ordained should have a dignified form, this person is ugly and disliked. Such a degenerate person, what kind of teaching does he have?"

復有人言：「此沙門唯二種人不度：一者死人，二者不樂出家。若不度此，眾不增長。」
Moreover, someone said, "This monk does not ordain two kinds of people: one is the dead, the other is those unwilling to become a monk. If they do not ordain this, the community will not grow."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, due to this reason, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Call this monk here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
After coming, the Buddha asked about the matter: "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
Answered, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日後陋形人不應與出家。」
The Buddha said, "From today, people with imperfect appearances should not be ordained as monks."



陋形者，太黑、太白、太黃、太赤、太長、太短、太麁、太細。
People with unsightly appearances are too dark, too pale, too yellow, too red, too tall, too short, too rough, too delicate.

復次陋形之人喜尚不喜見，況復瞋恚時。
Furthermore, people with unsightly appearances are not liked when they are seen, let alone when they are angry.

是陋形人不應與出家，若已出家不應驅出。
Such people should not be ordained, but if already ordained, they should not be expelled.

若度出家受具足者，越比尼罪。
If someone with these traits is ordained, it is a violation of the monastic rules.

是名陋形。是謂不名受具足。
This is called unsightly, and they are not considered fully ordained.

是中清淨如法者，名受具足。
Those who are pure and according to the rules are considered fully ordained.




羯磨、羯磨事，羯磨者，佛住舍衛城。
Karma, the matter of karma, is when the Buddha resides in Shravasti.

爾時瞻波比丘諍訟起不和合住，
At that time, disputes arose among the Jambudvipa monks, and they lived in disharmony.

一比丘舉一比丘、二比丘舉二比丘、眾多比丘舉眾多比丘。
One monk accused another monk, two monks accused two other monks, and many monks accused many others.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
The monks, for this reason, went to inform the World Honored One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽一人舉一人，乃至眾多人舉眾多人。」
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, no one person is allowed to accuse another person, and not even many people can accuse many others."

佛告諸比丘：「從今日後應作羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "From this day forward, you should perform karma."



羯磨者，四羯磨、二羯磨、白一羯磨、白三羯磨、四眾作羯磨、五眾作羯磨、十眾作羯磨、二十眾作羯磨、成就五非法不和合作羯磨已後悔、成就五如法和合作羯磨已後不悔。

Karma includes: four karmas, two karmas, one white karma, three white karmas, karma performed by four groups, karma by five groups, karma by ten groups, karma by twenty groups, the remorse after completing five illegal dissensions, and no remorse after completing five lawful consensual karmas.




四羯磨者，
The four categories of karmas are:

有非法和合羯磨、
illegal and harmonious karmas,

有如法不和合羯磨、
legal and disharmonious karmas,

有如法和合羯磨、
legal and harmonious karmas,

有不如法不和合羯磨，
and illegal and disharmonious karmas.

是名四羯磨。
These are called the four karmas.




二羯磨者，布薩羯磨、恭敬羯磨，是名二羯磨。
The two transactions are the uposatha transaction and the respect transaction, which are called the two transactions.




白一羯磨者，有二十八。

For the Pali monastic procedures, there are twenty-eight types.

何等二十八？

What are these twenty-eight?

出羯磨不離衣宿、離衣宿、

Procedures for leaving the community without relinquishing robes and belongings, for relinquishing them,

示房處、示作大房處、

Assigning a living space, or a larger living area,

有示作前房處、行鉢人、

Assigning a front area of the living space, designated alms gatherer,

行舍羅人、試外道、

Designated rain keeper, testing of non-believers,

持杖絡囊、典知床褥、

Staff and bag bearer, supervising beds and mats,

典知鑒食、典知差次食、

Supervising meals, supervising meal order,

典知分房，典知取衣，

Supervising allocation of rooms, overseeing the acquisition of robes,

典知掌衣，典知分衣，

Overseeing robe management, supervising robe distribution,

典知取㲲，典知舉㲲，

Supervising acquisition of wool, supervising lifting of wool,

典知分㲲，典知分華，

Supervising wool distribution, supervising flower distribution,

典知分香，典知分菓，

Supervising incense distribution, supervising fruit distribution,

典知分溫水，典知分雜餅，

Supervising warm water distribution, supervising mixed pastry distribution,

典知隨意舉，典知分粥人，

Overseeing optional offerings, supervising porridge allocation,

典知分小小雜物，是名二十八。

Supervising distribution of small miscellaneous items, these are the twenty-eight.



白三羯磨有八。
There are eight white legal procedures.

何等八？
What are the eight?

一、折伏，
1. Reprimanding,

二、不語，
2. Silence,

三、擯出，
3. Expulsion,

四、發喜，
4. Rejoicing,

五、舉，
5. Accusation,

六、別住，
6. Separation,

七、摩那埵，
7. Manata,

八、阿浮呵那，
8. Avahan,

是名白三羯磨。
These are called the eight white legal procedures.




四眾羯磨者
The Karmas of the Four Assemblies

布薩羯磨一切拜人四人得作
The Uposatha Karma can be held by four people who perform all the prostrations

是名四眾羯磨
This is called the Karmas of the Four Assemblies




五眾羯磨者，受自恣輸那邊地受具足，

The five-member assembly ceremony refers to the procedure where ordination is fully received in the Annoanaa region.

一切尼薩耆五人得作，

All five individuals fully receive the precepts.

是名五眾羯磨。

This is called the five-member assembly ceremony.




十眾羯磨者，比丘受具足、比丘尼受具足，十人得作，是名十眾羯磨。
Ten-fold acts of karma refer to the complete ordination of monks and nuns, performed by ten people; this is known as the ten-fold acts of karma.




二十眾羯磨者，比丘阿浮呵那、比丘尼阿浮呵那，二十人得作，是名二十眾羯磨。
The karmic process of twenty people involves the monks and nuns collectively, forming what is known as the karmic process of twenty.




成就五非法作羯磨已後悔者，
Those who regret after performing the five unlawful actions,

人不現前、不問、不引過，
People do not appear, do not question, do not expose faults,

非法、不和合，
Unlawful, not harmonious,

是名五非法作羯磨已後悔。
This is called regretting after performing the five unlawful actions.

成就五如法作羯磨已後不悔者，
Those who do not regret after performing the five lawful actions,

人現前問、問已、自引過，
People appear and question, having questioned, they expose their own faults,

如法、和合，
Lawful, harmonious,

是名五如法作羯磨已後不悔。
This is called not regretting after performing the five lawful actions.




是中應二十眾作羯磨，十眾作不成就。
When twenty should perform the karman, if done by ten, it is not accomplished.

應十眾作羯磨，五眾作不成就。
When ten should perform the karman, if done by five, it is not accomplished.

應五眾作羯磨，四眾作不成就。
When five should perform the karman, if done by four, it is not accomplished.

應作白三羯磨，白一不成就。
When three declarations are required, one declaration does not accomplish it.

應作白一羯磨，單白不成就。
When one declaration is required, a single white does not accomplish it.

應單白羯磨，而作求聽羯磨不成就。
When a single white karman is required, performing a seeking consent karman does not accomplish it.

應作求聽羯磨，白成就。
When seeking consent karman is required, the declaration accomplishes it.

應作白羯磨，白一羯磨成就。
When a declared karman is required, one declaration karman accomplishes it.

應作白一羯磨，作白三成就。
When one declaration karman is required, making three declarations accomplishes it.

應作四眾羯磨，若五眾作成就。
When four should perform the karman, if done by five, it is accomplished.

應五眾作羯磨，十眾作成就。
When five should perform the karman, if done by ten, it is accomplished.

應十眾作羯磨，二十眾作成就，是名羯磨。
When ten should perform the karman, if done by twenty, it is accomplished; this is called karman.



羯磨事者，比丘受具足羯磨事、比丘尼受具足羯磨事、支滿羯磨事、遮法清淨羯磨事、不具足清淨羯磨事、不生戒羯磨事、罪根羯磨事、不捨根羯磨事、捨根羯磨事、和合根羯磨事。

The matters of karma include the bhikkhu full ordination ceremony, the bhikkhuni full ordination ceremony, the complete karma ceremony, the protective law purification karma ceremony, the incomplete purification karma ceremony, the unborn precepts karma ceremony, the root of sins karma ceremony, the non-renunciation roots karma ceremony, the renunciation roots karma ceremony, and the union roots karma ceremony.




比丘受具足羯磨事者，受具足人求和上，
A monk's full ordination Kamma involves the candidate seeking a preceptor,

和上與求衣鉢、與求眾、與求戒師、與求空靜處教師，
the preceptor asking the assembly for robes and bowl, and for assembly members, a sponsor for the precepts, and a teacher for silent and empty places.

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，是二俱名比丘受具足羯磨事。
These events can give rise to Kamma, the declaration and procedure, both of which are called the ordination Kamma for a monk.




比丘尼受具足羯磨事者，比丘尼已與受具足竟，向比丘僧中，僧應問比丘尼：「清淨無遮法不？」

In the matter of a bhikkhuni receiving full ordination through the karmavacana procedure, once the bhikkhuni has completed the ordination, she should approach the bhikkhu assembly, where a monk should ask her: "Is the procedure free from obstruction?"

答言：「已清淨。」是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，是二俱名比丘尼受具足羯磨事。

She should reply, "It is free from obstruction." These matters give rise to the karmavacana, which is termed as the full ordination karmavacana for bhikkhunis.




支滿羯磨事者，受具足人已求和上，
The person who is fully ordained seeks a preceptor,

和上已與求衣鉢，與求眾、與求戒師、
the preceptor has given the robe and bowl, given to the assembly, given to the ordination teacher,

與求空靜處教師，教師推與僧，
given to the teacher of the secluded place, the teacher recommends to the Sangha,

從僧中乞受具足，問無遮法已，
seeks full ordination from the Sangha, after enquiring about the unobstructed method,

說四依。
he explains the four dependencies.

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，
These matters can give rise to formal procedures, proclamations,

是二俱名支滿羯磨事。
these two are together called the matter of fully completed procedures.



遮法清淨羯磨事者  
The matter of purity in the obstructive Dharma procedure  

遮法中清淨  
Purity within the obstructive Dharma  

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨  
These matters can give rise to karma, both karmic and white karmic  

是二俱名遮法清淨  
Both are named purity in the obstructive Dharma  



羯磨事不具足清淨羯磨事者，支分不具足清淨，
If the elements of the karmic process are not pure and complete, the karmic process is not pure and complete.

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，
These matters can lead to karmic and pure karmic processes,

是二俱名不具足清淨羯磨事。
These two are both named impure and incomplete karmic processes.




不生戒羯磨事者，污比丘尼淨行、盜住、越濟人、五無間罪、犯波羅夷，沙彌惡邪見，是諸事不生羯磨、白羯磨，是二俱名不生戒羯磨事。
Those who cannot initiate a disciplinary act: polluting the nuns' pure conduct, theft, rescuing people, the five grave sins, committing a major offense, and having corrupt views as a novice monk. These are matters for which neither a resolution nor a formal proceeding can be initiated, collectively known as matters of non-initiation for disciplinary action.




罪根羯磨事者，五眾罪：
The root of offenses and karmic actions includes the five groups of offenses:

波羅夷、僧伽婆尸沙、波夜提、波羅提提舍尼、越比尼罪，
Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Patidesaniya, and Dukkat offenses,

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，
These matters can give rise to Kamma and Pali Kamma,

是二俱名罪根羯磨事。
These two together are called the root of offenses and karmic actions.




不捨根羯磨事者，
If one does not abandon the matter of the karmic roots,

比丘屏處三諫、
A monk advises three times in private,

多人中三諫、
Advises three times among many people,

眾僧中三諫，
Advises three times among the assembly of monks,

不捨是諸事，
If these matters are not abandoned,

能生羯磨、白羯磨，
It can give rise to karmic and pure karmic actions,

是二俱名不捨根羯磨事。
These two are both called the matter of not abandoning the karmic roots.




捨根羯磨事者，屏處三諫、眾多人中三諫、僧中三諫，捨是諸事，能生羯磨、白羯磨，是二俱名捨根羯磨事。
To abandon the root of karma means to give warnings three times privately, three times among many people, and three times among monks. These matters are relinquished, and it can give rise to karma and the declaration of karma; both are called abandoning the root of karma.




和合根羯磨事者，比丘僧集行舍羅，
As for the consensus of the assembly matters, the gathering of monks carries out.

不來者與欲，唱和合僧，
Those who cannot attend express their consent, thus forming a harmonious sangha.

是諸事能生羯磨、白羯磨，
These matters give rise to karma, both verbal and decisive.

是二俱名和合根羯磨事。
Both are known as the consensus origin karmic matters.

是謂羯磨事。
This is called a karmic matter.




折伏羯磨事者，佛住舍衛城，瞻婆比丘諍訟，相言不和合住。
Regarding the Penance Ceremony, the Buddha was residing in Shravasti, where the Bhikkhus of Jambudvipa were in dispute and not living in harmony.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, went to the Blessed One.

佛言：「應與作折伏羯磨。」
The Buddha said, "You should perform the Penance Ceremony."

折伏羯磨有五事，一切折伏羯磨。
There are five matters related to the Penance Ceremony.

佛在舍衛城制何等五？
What are the five instituted by the Buddha in Shravasti?

一、習近八事；
First, getting accustomed to the eight actions;

二、數數犯罪；
Second, frequently committing offenses;

三、太早入太冥出，惡友惡伴非宜處行；
Third, going out too early or returning too late, associating with bad friends or unsuitable companions;

四、諍訟相言；
Fourth, engaging in disputes and arguments;

五、恭敬年少。
Fifth, respecting the young.




，佛住舍衛城，爾時慈地比丘，身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。
The practitioner of the eight habits, Buddha resided in the city of Sravasti, at that time the monk Cidi was accustomed to physical, verbal, and both physical and verbal closeness.

身習近住者，共床坐、共床眠、共器食、迭互著衣、共出共入，是名身習近住。
Physical closeness means sharing a bed, sitting together, sleeping together, eating from the same vessel, exchanging clothes, leaving and entering together, this is known as physical closeness.

口習近住者，迭互染污心語，是名口習近住。
Verbal closeness involves conversing with impure language, this is known as verbal closeness.

身口習近住者，共床坐、共床眠、共器食、迭互著衣、共出共入、語時展轉相為染污心語，是名身口習近住。
Physical and verbal closeness includes sharing a bed, sitting together, sleeping together, eating from the same vessel, exchanging clothes, leaving and entering together, and conversing with impure language, this is known as both physical and verbal closeness.

諸比丘諫言：「長老慈地比丘！莫身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。」
The monks advised, "Elder Cidi! Do not engage in physical, verbal, or both physical and verbal closeness."

一諫不止，乃至三諫不止。諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Repeated advising occurred until the third instance, yet he did not desist. The monks due to this reason approached the World Honored One (Buddha).

佛言：「是慈地比丘身習近、口習近、身口習近住，三諫不止者，僧應與作身習近住折伏羯磨。」
Buddha said, "Monk Cidi engages in physical, verbal, both physical and verbal closeness, and despite three advisories he does not desist, the Sangha should perform a disciplinary act on physical closeness."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是慈地比丘身習近住，三諫不止。若僧時到，僧與慈地比丘身習近住作折伏羯磨。白如是。」
The one performing the act should say: "Venerable Sangha, listen! Monk Cidi engages in physical closeness and despite three advisories does not desist. If the Sangha's time has arrived, the Sangha shall perform a disciplinary act on Monk Cidi's physical closeness. Thus, I state."

「大德僧聽！慈地比丘身習近住，三諫不止。僧今與慈地比丘身習近住作折伏羯磨。諸大德忍僧與慈地比丘身習近住作折伏羯磨，忍者僧默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable Sangha, listen! Monk Cidi engages in physical closeness, despite three advisories does not desist. The Sangha now performs a disciplinary act on Monk Cidi's physical closeness. If the Venerables consent, remain silent; if not, speak out. This is the first act."

第二、第三亦如是說。「僧已忍與慈地比丘作身習近住折伏羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
The second and third acts are stated similarly. "The Sangha has consented to apply the disciplinary act on Monk Cidi's physical closeness, because the Sangha has consented and remains silent, this matter is thus held."

口習近住、身口習近住，亦如是說。
For verbal closeness and both physical and verbal closeness, it is also stated likewise


復次佛住舍衛城，爾時優陀夷與好生比丘尼身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。

Once again, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, at that time, Uttara had close physical and verbal interactions with the nun Bhiksuni Samkrti.

身習近住者，申手內共坐、迭互著衣，是名身習近住。

Physical close interaction means sitting together with physical contact and exchanging clothing, this is called physical close interaction.

口習近住者，展轉染污心語，是名口習近住。

Verbal close interaction means exchanging words with impure intentions, this is called verbal close interaction.

身口習近住者，申手內共坐、迭互著衣、更相為語、共染污心語，是名身口習近住。

Physical and verbal close interaction means both sitting together with physical contact, exchanging clothing, and speaking impure words to each other, this is called physical and verbal close interaction.

諸比丘諫言：「長老優陀夷！莫與好生比丘尼身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。」

The monks advised, "Elder Uttara! Do not engage in physical or verbal close interactions with the nun Bhiksuni Samkrti."

一諫、二諫、三諫不止。

They advised once, twice, three times, but he did not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks reported this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「是優陀夷與好生比丘尼身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住，三諫不止者，僧應與作身習近住折伏羯磨。」

The Buddha told the monks, "If Uttara engages in physical and verbal close interactions with the nun Bhiksuni Samkrti and doesn't heed advice thrice, the Sangha should perform a disciplinary action against him for physical close interaction."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是優陀夷與好生比丘尼身習近住，三諫不止。

The person performing the disciplinary action should say: "Honored Sangha, listen! Uttara has engaged in physical interactions with the nun Bhiksuni Samkrti and didn't heed advice thrice.

若僧時到，僧與優陀夷作身習近住折伏羯磨。如是白。」

If it is the right time for the Sangha, let them perform a disciplinary action against Uttara for physical close interaction. Thus, it is declared."

白三羯磨，乃至「僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

This should be repeated three times, declaring, "As the Sangha is silent, this matter is upheld."

口習近住、身口習近住，亦如上說。

The same procedure applies to verbal and physical-verbal close interactions, as previously mentioned.



有四重禁誡，當念而生，

There are four major prohibitions which should be remembered,

莫乃至毀呰、使彼破毀聖戒、

Do not criticize others or break the holy precepts,

莫於此中行非法行，何以故。

Do not engage in unlawful conduct within, for what reason?

彼諸比丘持此禁誡，則為持戒。

The monks who uphold these prohibitions are upholding the precepts. 




復次佛住舍衛城，爾時蘇毘提比丘與蘇毘提夷比丘尼身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住，如好生比丘尼中廣說。
Again, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, at that time, the monk Subhūti and the nun Subhūti had frequent personal and verbal interactions, discussing matters extensively among the nuns.




復次爾時有比丘，到居士家內，與婦人身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。
At that time, there was a monk who went to a householder's home and became physically familiar with the women, verbally familiar, and both physically and verbally familiar.

身習近住者，與母人申手內坐，以香花菓蓏相授，為其走使，是名身習近住。
Becoming physically familiar means sitting next to women, handing over fragrant flowers and fruits, and doing errands for them, which is called being physically familiar.

口習近住者，共染污心語，是名口習近住。
Being verbally familiar means speaking with an impure mind, which is called being verbally familiar.

身口習近住者，是上二事俱，是名身口習近住。
Being both physically and verbally familiar means doing both of the above, which is called being physically and verbally familiar.

諸比丘諫言：「長老！莫與婦人身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。」
The monks admonished him, saying: "Elder! Do not become physically familiar, verbally familiar, or both with women."

如是三諫不止。
The admonition was given three times but did not cease.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Because of this, the monks went to report to the World-Honored One.

亦如上優陀夷中廣說。
It is also extensively explained in the section above regarding Udāyin.



衛城，  
At that time, the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti,  

爾時有比丘與不能男身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。  
there was a monk who was physically living closely with a eunuch, verbally living closely, and both physically and verbally living closely.  

身習近住者，申手內坐、共出共入，是名身習近住。  
Physically living closely means sitting together with hands extended, going out together and coming in together, this is called physically living closely.  

口習近住者，共染污心語，是名口習近住。  
Verbally living closely means engaging in impure speech together, this is called verbally living closely.  

身口習近住者，上二事俱，是名身口習近住。  
Both physically and verbally living closely means doing both of the above actions, this is called physically and verbally living closely.  

諸比丘諫言：「長老！莫與不能男身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住。」  
Monks advised him, "Elder! Do not physically, verbally, or both physically and verbally live closely with a eunuch."  

乃至三諫不止。  
Even after being advised three times, he didn't stop.  

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，亦如上優陀夷中廣說。  
As a result, the monks went to report this to the Blessed One, as extensively explained in the previous Udaya discourse.  




復次佛住舍衛城，
Again, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti,

爾時優陀夷與共行弟子身習近住、口習近住、身口習近住，
at that time, Udayin and his fellow disciples practiced close living in body, close living in speech, and close living in both body and speech,

亦如上慈地比丘中廣說。
as was extensively explained among the monks in the higher realms of compassion.



復次佛住舍衛城，

At another time, the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti,

爾時闡陀與童子身習近住、

At that time, Chantaka was living near the young boy in close practices of the body,

口習近住、

In close practices of speech,

身口習近住，

And in close practices of both body and speech,

亦如上慈地比丘中廣說。

As extensively explained among the monks in the upper abode of compassion.

是名八事習近住。

This is called the practice of the eight things in close proximity.




，佛住舍衛城，爾時尸利耶婆比丘，五眾一一罪中數數犯。
The repeated offender during the Buddha's stay in the city of Shravasti was the monk Shilayapa, who repeatedly committed each of the five offenses.

諸比丘諫言：「長老！五眾一一罪中莫數數犯。」
The monks advised him, "Elder! Do not repeatedly commit each of the five offenses."

一諫不止、二諫不止、三諫不止。
Once advised, he did not stop; twice advised, he did not stop; thrice advised, he did not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, went to report to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是尸利耶婆，五眾一一罪中若數數犯者，作數數犯罪折伏羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "If Shilayapa commits any of the five offenses repeatedly, perform the repeated offense disciplinary act."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是尸利耶婆比丘數數犯罪，三諫不止。」
The one responsible for the act should say: "Venerable Sangha! This monk Shilayapa has repeatedly offended, and did not stop after three advices."

若僧時到，僧與尸利耶婆比丘作數數犯罪折伏羯磨。白如是。」
When the time comes for the Sangha, the Sangha performs the repeated offense disciplinary act on Shilayapa. Thus it's stated."

「大德僧聽！尸利耶婆比丘數數犯罪，三諫不止。」
"Venerable Sangha! Monk Shilayapa has repeatedly offended, not stopping after three advices."

僧今與尸利耶婆比丘作數數犯罪折伏羯磨。
The Sangha will now perform the repeated offense disciplinary act on Monk Shilayapa.

諸大德忍僧與尸利耶婆比丘作數數犯罪折伏羯磨，忍者僧默然，若不忍者便說。
Those who consent to the Sangha performing the repeated offense disciplinary act on Monk Shilayapa should remain silent; if anyone objects, they should speak.

是第一羯磨。」
This is the first disciplinary act."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third statements are made in the same way.

「僧已與尸利耶婆比丘作數數犯罪折伏羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"Now that the Sangha has performed the repeated offense disciplinary act on Monk Shilayapa, and the Sangha consented by remaining silent, thus should this matter be upheld."

是名數數犯罪。
This is called repeated offense.



太早入、太冥出、惡友、惡伴、非處行者，

Early entry, late exit, bad friends, bad companions, improper conduct,

佛住舍衛城，

The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī,

爾時迦露比丘太早入聚落、太冥出聚落、惡友、惡伴、非處行。

At that time, the monk Kāru entered the village too early, left too late, had bad friends, bad companions, and improper conduct.

太早入者，太早入聚落乞。

Those who enter too early are begging in the village too early.

太冥出者，冥出聚落。

Those who exit too late are leaving the village when it's dark.

惡友者，與象子、馬子、偷兒、劫賊、摴蒱兒，如是等共相親厚。

Bad friends are associating closely with the sons of elephants, horses, thieves, robbers, and gamblers.

惡伴者，如惡友。

Bad companions are like bad friends.

同非處行者，寡婦家、大童女家、婬女家、不能男家、醜名比丘尼、醜名沙彌尼，如是非處行。

Improper conduct includes visiting houses of widows, young maidens, prostitutes, impotent men, disreputable nuns, and disreputable novice nuns.

諸比丘諫言：「長老！莫太早入、太冥出，乃至醜名沙彌尼處行。」

The monks admonished, "Elder! Do not enter too early, do not exit too late, do not engage with disreputable novice nuns."

一諫不止、二諫、三諫不止。

They advised once, twice, thrice, yet he did not desist.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks went to inform the Blessed One of this matter.

佛告諸比丘：「是迦露比丘太早入、太冥出，乃至非宜處行，三諫不止者，僧應作太早入折伏羯磨。」

The Buddha told the monks, "The monk Kāru enters too early and exits too late; he conducts himself improperly. If after being advised three times he does not desist, the order should perform an act of disciplinary procedure."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！迦露比丘太早入聚落，三諫不止。」

The person performing the act should say, "Venerable community, listen! Monk Kāru enters the village too early and did not stop after being advised three times."

若僧時到，僧今與迦露比丘作太早入聚落折伏羯磨。如是白。」

When the time is right for the monastic community, the community now carries out the act of disciplinary procedure against monk Kāru for entering the village too early. Thus is it declared."

白三羯磨，乃至「僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

It is declared three times, and thus "since the community is silent, the matter is upheld."

如是太冥出、惡友、惡伴、非宜處行，亦如是。

In the same way, for actions like leaving too late, having bad friends, bad companions, and improper conduct, the procedure is similar.



諍訟相言者，佛住舍衛城，爾時馬宿比丘自高自用，諍訟相言。
During a dispute, Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti. At that time, the monk Masu was arrogant and engaged in disputes.

諸比丘諫言：「長老馬宿比丘！莫諍訟相言。」
The monks advised, "Elder monk Masu! Do not engage in disputes."

如是一諫不止、二諫、三諫不止。
Despite being advised once, twice, and thrice, he did not stop.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Due to this reason, the monks went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「五法成就，當知諍訟更起。
The Buddha told the monks, "When five factors are fulfilled, disputes arise again.

何等五法？
What are the five factors?

羯磨言非法、如法集言非法、如法出過言非法、如法捨言非法、如法與言非法，是名五非法；
Karma spoken illegally, lawful gathering spoken illegally, lawful confession spoken illegally, lawful renunciation spoken illegally, lawful granting spoken illegally, these are called the five illegal acts;

反上五事名如法。
The opposite of these five matters is called lawful.

諸比丘！應如是教長老比丘必應成就五法入眾。
Monks! You should instruct the elder monk to perfect these five factors to enter the assembly.

何等五？
What are the five?

小聲入眾，聞羯磨已當信，信已奉行。
Enter the assembly quietly, hearing karma should bring belief, and belief should lead to practice.

若羯磨不如法不能遮者，應與欲。
If karma is not lawful and cannot be prevented, permission should be granted.

若不能與欲者，應與比坐見不欲。
If unable to grant permission, it should be discussed with others to see disagreement.

比丘聞是教時。
When the monk hears this teaching,

便言：『我能善語，何故小聲入眾？
he says, 'I can speak well, why should I enter quietly?

我亦多聞，何故聞羯磨已當信？
I am also well-learned, why should I believe after hearing karma?

我善知法，何故聞已當行？
I know the law well, why should I act upon hearing?

我亦善於羯磨，何故聞羯磨不如法，不能遮？
I am also skilled in karma, why can't I prevent it when I hear it is not lawful?

應與欲，我當自往。
Permission should be granted, I will go myself.

何故與比坐見不欲？我當遮。』
Why should I discuss with others to see disagreement? I should prevent it.'

佛告諸比丘：「五法成就諍訟更起，僧應與作折伏羯磨。
The Buddha told the monks, "When five factors are fulfilled and disputes arise, the Sangha should perform the act of subjugation through karma.

何等五？
What are the five?

一者自高；二者麁弊兇性；三者無義語；
First is arrogance; second is harsh and fierce nature; third is malicious words;

四者非時語；五者不親附善人。
fourth is speaking out of place; fifth is not associating with good people.

是名五法成就。
These are called the five fulfilled factors.

僧應與作折伏羯磨。」
The Sangha should perform the act of subjugation through karma."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！
The person performing karma should say: "Venerable Sangha, listen!

馬宿比丘自，高諍訟相言，三諫不止。
Monk Masu is arrogant, and engaged in disputes, not stopping after three admonitions.

若僧時到，僧今與馬宿比丘自高作折伏羯磨。
If it is time for the Sangha, the Sangha now performs the act of subjugation against the arrogance of monk Masu through karma.

白如是。」
Thus declare."

「大德僧聽！馬宿比丘自高，諍訟相言，三諫不止。
"Venerable Sangha, listen! Monk Masu is arrogant and involved in disputes, not stopping after three warnings.

僧今與馬宿比丘自高作折伏羯磨。
The Sangha now performs the act of subjugation against monk Masu's arrogance through karma.

諸大德忍僧與馬宿比丘自高作折伏羯磨，忍者僧默然，不忍者便說。
Venerable ones, if you tolerate the Sangha performing karma against monk Masu's arrogance, remain silent; if not, speak up.

是第一羯磨。」
This is the first karma."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third are declared likewise.

「僧已與馬宿比丘自高作折伏羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has completed the act of subjugation against monk Masu's arrogance through karma, and as the Sangha remained silent in tolerance, this matter is upheld."

後四事亦如是說。
The latter four matters are also declared likewise.



恭敬年少者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Honoring the young, the Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī and expounded as above.

爾時闡陀比丘度年少出家，身自供給晨起問訊，與出大小行器、唾壺著常處，與按摩身體，授與衣鉢，共入聚落令在前行，到檀越家令在上座處坐，先受供養。
At that time, Venerable Chanda ordained a young person, provided for him, greeted him upon rising, gave him large and small walking utensils, placed the spittoon in its usual place, massaged his body, gave him robes and bowls. Together, they entered the village, allowing him to walk ahead. At the donor's home, he allowed him to sit in the seat of honor and first receive alms.

供養已，與收鉢蕩滌還著常處。食後與染衣熏鉢，與敷床褥日冥，與燃燈火、內唾壺大小行器。
After the alms, he collected and cleaned the bowls, placing them back in their usual place. After the meal, he dyed clothes, smoked bowls, laid out bedding at sunset, lit lamps, and brought in spittoons and small and large walking utensils.

諸比丘諫言：「長老！莫供給年少，年少應供給長老。」
The monks admonished him: "Elder! Do not serve the young; the young should serve the elder."

答言：「如長老語，但此年少先樂人出家，是故我愛念、恭敬、慚愧，隨逐供給。」
He replied, "As the elder says, but since this young person was first to joyfully leave home, I therefore cherish, honor, am ashamed, and serve him."

如是一諫不止、二諫、三諫不止。
Thus, they admonished once, twice, thrice, without stopping.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, with this matter, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼闡陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Chanda here."

來已，佛具問上事：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha asked in detail about the above matter: "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "It is true indeed."

佛言：「癡人！汝於如來所無有愛念、恭敬、慚愧、隨逐，而更於年少所愛念、恭敬、慚愧、隨逐。」
The Buddha said, "Foolish person! You have no affection, respect, shame, or service towards the Tathāgata, but rather towards the young one."

佛告諸比丘：「是闡陀比丘於年少所愛念，僧應與作愛念供給年少折伏羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "This Venerable Chanda harbors affection for the young; the Sangha should perform the process of censure for his affection and service."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是闡陀比丘愛念恭敬給侍年少，三諫不止。若僧時到，僧今與闡陀比丘愛念供給年少作折伏羯磨。白如是。」
The official should say: "Venerable Sangha, listen! Venerable Chanda cherishes, respects, and attends to the young, and despite three admonitions, did not stop. If the time is here, now the Sangha will perform the process of censure for Venerable Chanda's affection and service to the young. Thus is it declared."

「大德僧聽！闡陀比丘愛念供給年少，三諫不止。僧今與闡陀比丘愛念供給年少作折伏羯磨。諸大德忍僧與闡陀比丘愛念供給年少比丘作折伏羯磨忍者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable Sangha, listen! Venerable Chanda loves and serves the young and has not stopped after three admonitions. Now the Sangha will perform censure for Venerable Chanda's affection and service to the young. Let those elders who consent for the Sangha to perform censure on Chanda remain silent; if any do not consent, let them speak. This is the first act of the formal procedure."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third parts are declared similarly.

「僧已與闡陀比丘愛念供給年少作折伏羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"Once the Sangha has completed the censure process for Venerable Chanda's affection and service to the young, because the Sangha consented and remained silent, this matter is to be upheld."

恭敬、慚愧、隨逐亦如是說，是名折伏羯磨。
In the same way for honor, shame, and service, this is called the process of censure.




不共語羯磨者，佛住舍衛城，爾時馬宿比丘作折伏羯磨已，不隨順行，所應行事而不行，所應捨事而不捨。
Regarding the punishment of non-communication, when the Buddha was residing in Shravasti, at that time, the monk Mashu had undergone a disciplinary act but did not follow it accordingly, not performing what should be done and not abandoning what should be abandoned.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, due to this reason, approached the Blessed One.

佛言：「是馬宿比丘作折伏羯磨已，不隨順行，所應行事而不行，所應捨事而不捨，僧應與作不共語羯磨。」
The Buddha said: "This monk Mashu has undergone a disciplinary act but does not follow it accordingly, not performing what should be done, and not abandoning what should be abandoned. The community of monks should carry out the punishment of non-communication."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！是馬宿比丘作折伏羯磨已，不隨順行，所應行事而不行，所應捨事而不捨。
The official of the disciplinary act should say this: "Venerable Sangha, please listen! This monk Mashu has undergone a disciplinary act but does not follow it accordingly, not performing what should be done and not abandoning what should be abandoned.

若僧時到，僧與馬宿比丘作不共語羯磨。
When the time is right for the Sangha, the community should carry out the punishment of non-communication with this monk Mashu.

白如是。」
Declare it thus."

白三羯磨，乃至「僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
Three declarations should be made for the official disciplinary act until the point that the "Sangha tolerates in silence; thus, this matter is upheld."



復次佛住舍衛城，爾時有摩訶羅出家，數犯小戒，別眾食、處處食、停食食、共器食、女人同室宿、過三宿、共床眠、共床坐、不淨菓食、受生肉、受生穀、受金銀。
Furthermore, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, there was a monk named Mahallaka who repeatedly violated minor rules: eating separately from the group, eating in various places, eating after the designated time, eating from a shared container, staying overnight in a woman's room for more than three nights, sleeping and sitting on the same bed, eating impure fruits, accepting raw meat, raw grains, and gold and silver.

諸比丘諫言：「長老不應作是事。」答言：「長老當語我，我當受行。」
The monks advised him, "Elder, you should not do this." To which he replied, "Elder, tell me, and I will follow."

諸比丘言：「是摩訶羅有修學意。」
The monks said, "This Mahallaka has the intention to cultivate and learn."

後復數數犯小小戒，別眾食乃至受金銀。
Later, he repeatedly violated minor precepts, from eating separately to accepting gold and silver.

諸比丘復諫言：「摩訶羅不應作是事。」答言：「長老應語我，我當受行。」
The monks again advised him, "Mahallaka, you should not do this." He replied, "Elder, you should tell me, and I will follow."

後復數數犯。
Later, he repeatedly violated the rules.

諸比丘言：「是摩訶羅出家，不知恩教、不順教誨、諂曲不實、不欲修學。」
The monks said, "This Mahallaka, having renounced the world, does not understand the teachings, does not follow guidance, is deceitful and dishonest, and does not wish to learn."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「是摩訶羅出家，不知恩教、不順教誨，僧應與作不共語羯磨。」
The Buddha said, "This Mahallaka, having renounced the world, does not understand the teachings, does not follow guidance, and the Sangha should perform the 'not talking' disciplinary action with him."

羯磨人當作是說：「大德僧聽！是摩訶羅出家不知恩教、不隨教誨。若僧時到，僧與摩訶羅作不共語羯磨。白如是。」
The person performing the disciplinary action should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! This Mahallaka, having renounced the world, does not understand the teachings and does not follow guidance. When the time is right for the Sangha, perform the 'not talking' disciplinary action with Mahallaka. Thus, I say."

白三羯磨乃至「僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
Declare the 'not talking' disciplinary action three times until "The Sangha, being silent, accepts, thus the matter is upheld."

是名不共語羯磨。
This is called the 'not talking' disciplinary action.



擯出羯磨者，佛住舍衛城，爾時六群比丘在迦尸邑住，
Expelling the karmic duties, the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, while at that time the group of six monks lived in the city of Kashi,

作身非威儀、口非威儀、身口非威儀，
performing improper bodily conduct, improper verbal conduct, improper bodily and verbal conduct,

作身害、口害、身口害，
causing harm with the body, harm with speech, harm with both body and speech,

作身邪命、口邪命、身口邪命，
engaging in wrong livelihood with the body, wrong livelihood with speech, wrong livelihood with both body and speech,

如上僧伽婆尸沙，黑山聚落中廣說，是名擯出羯磨。
as widely spoken about in the higher offenses of the monastic code, in the Black Mountain settlement, this is called the expulsion of karmic duties.




發喜羯磨者，喜優婆夷、舍那階、油熬魚子、迦露、摩訶南、六群比丘。
The one who initiates the act of joyous Karma is the virtuous laywoman, She-Na, the oil-cooked fish roe, Jia-Lu, Maha South, and the six groups of Bhikkhus.




喜優婆夷者，佛住舍衛城，爾時難陀遊行諸國還到舍衛，

At the time when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, Nanda returned to Shravasti after traveling through various countries.

時難陀著入聚落衣，持鉢往至優婆夷家。

At that time, Nanda wore a robe to enter the village and went to the house of a laywoman with his alms bowl.

喜優婆夷見已歡喜，問訊言：「善來阿闍梨！何故希行？」

The laywoman was pleased to see him and greeted him, saying, "Welcome, teacher! Why are you rare in coming?"

即請令坐，坐已難陀言：「我希行，欲與我何物？」

She immediately invited him to sit, and after sitting, Nanda said, "I am rarely here, what would you give me?"

答言：「隨所須與，若前食、若後食、若粥、若餅、若菓，隨所須當作。」

She replied, "I will give you whatever you need, whether it is a meal, soup, porridge, cakes, or fruits, whatever you require will be prepared."

難陀言：「我須前食，當好作。」

Nanda said, "I need a meal, please make it well."

答言：「如教，我當好作，唯願明日早來。」

She replied, "As you teach, I shall make it well, requesting only that you come early tomorrow."

作是語已便去。

After saying this, she left.

後優婆夷晨起，作好前食，敷座踟蹰而待。

The laywoman rose early the next morning, prepared a good meal, arranged the seat, and anxiously waited.

難陀多事，遂忘不往。

Nanda, being busy with many affairs, forgot and did not go.

優婆夷待見時過不來故，即於此食中可停者舉，不可停者便食。

As the laywoman waited and saw that the time had passed without his arrival, she set aside the food that could be stored and ate what could not.

如是第二日、第三日待不來，便盡取食。

Thus on the second and third days, she waited, and when he did not come, she completely consumed the meal.

到第四日方來，問言：「少病，優婆夷。」

On the fourth day, he finally came and asked, "Feeling a little ill, laywoman?"

優婆夷嫌言：「阿闍梨受我請前食，何故不來？」

The laywoman complained, saying, "Teacher, you accepted my invitation for a meal, why did you not come?"

答言：「優婆夷瞋耶？」

He replied, "Laywoman, are you angry?"

彼言：「瞋。」「若爾者，我悔過。」

She said, "Angry." "If so, I repent."

優婆夷言：「向世尊悔過去。」

The laywoman said, "Go and repent before the World-Honored One."

難陀即便向佛悔過。

Nanda immediately went to the Buddha to repent.

佛言：「何故悔過？」

The Buddha said, "Why do you repent?"

難陀具以上事白佛。

Nanda explained the above matters to the Buddha.

佛言：「癡人！此優婆夷於佛比丘僧無所匱惜，汝何故擾亂？」

The Buddha said, "Foolish man! This laywoman has nothing but devotion to the Buddha, monks, and the Sangha, why do you disturb her?"

佛告諸比丘：「是優婆夷在家篤信，

The Buddha told the monks, "This laywoman is devoted at home,

難陀擾亂令發不喜，僧今應與難陀作發喜羯磨。」

Nanda disturbed her and caused displeasure, the Sangha should now give Nanda the joyful karma ceremony."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！

The one performing the karma should say, "Venerable monks, listen!

是難陀比丘擾亂俗人，生不喜心。

This monk Nanda disturbed a layperson, causing feelings of displeasure.

若僧時到，僧與難陀作俗人發喜羯磨。

If the time is suitable for the Sangha, let the Sangha perform the joyful karma ceremony for Nanda for laypeople.

白如是。」

Thus is the motion."

「大德僧聽！難陀比丘擾亂俗人，發不歡喜。

"Venerable monks, listen! Monk Nanda disturbed a layperson, causing unhappiness.

僧今與難陀作俗人發喜羯磨。

The Sangha will now perform the joyful karma ceremony for Nanda concerning laypeople.

諸大德忍僧與難陀作俗人發喜羯磨，忍者僧默然，若不忍者便說。

Monks who agree to perform the ceremony silently consent, if not, speak.

是第一羯磨。」

This is the first karma.

第二、第三亦如是說。

The second and third proceedings are stated likewise.

「僧已與難陀作俗人發喜羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

"The Sangha has completed the joyful karma ceremony for Nanda for laypeople, those who silently consented have upheld this matter."

是名喜優婆夷。

This is the story of the joyful laywoman.



舍那階者，佛住舍衛城，爾時質帝隸居士請僧與藥。

When Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti, at that time, the householder Jitaili invited the monks and offered medicine.

時六群比丘聞已，自相謂言：「居士請僧與藥，當往試之。」

When the group of six monks heard this, they said to each other, "The householder has invited the monks and is offering medicine; we should go and test him."

到時著入聚落衣持鉢，往到其家，共相問訊。

Then they dressed in village attire, carried their alms bowls, went to his house, and greeted each other.

相問訊已，作是言：「我聞居士請僧與藥。審爾不？」

After exchanging greetings, they said, "We heard that the householder is inviting the monks and offering medicine. Is this true?"

答言：「爾！阿闍梨有所須耶？」

He replied, "Yes! Is there anything the venerable needs?"

答言：「我須舍那階一擔。」

The monk replied, "I need one load of Sarkarakhuda."

居士言：「須我辦，當與。」

The householder said, "If you need it, I will prepare it and give it."

比丘言：「奇怪，不先辦藥而欲請僧。汝不知耶？一比丘服藥，如雪山一大龍象食等。」

The monk said, "Strange, you did not prepare the medicine first and yet want to invite the monks. Don't you know? When one monk takes medicine, it's like a great elephant in the snow mountains eating."

汝不實施，而但求名。」

"You are not genuinely giving, but only seeking fame."

居士言：「阿闍梨！王家庫中尚無儲藥，況復我家？待辦相與。」

The householder said, "Venerable! There is not even stored medicine in the royal treasury, let alone my house? I will prepare and give it to you later."

比丘言：「與以不與自隨汝意。」

The monk said, "Whether to give or not is up to you."

言已便出。

After saying this, they left.

後居士遣人到拘隣提國象聚落，得舍那階來，白阿闍梨：「已得舍那階，可來取之。」

Later, the householder sent someone to the elephant village in the Kingdom of Kulinanda, obtained Sarkarakhuda, and informed the venerable, "I have obtained Sarkarakhuda, you may come to take it."

聞是語已，相看面笑。

Upon hearing these words, they looked at each other and smiled.

居士嫌言：「何故相看笑？我未辦時，殷勤苦索，今者已辦而笑不取。」

The householder said displeased, "Why are you smiling at each other? When I hadn't prepared it yet, you were diligently demanding, and now that it's ready, you smile and don't take it."

我家所有，於佛比丘僧無所愛惜，尊者何故相試？」

"What my family has, I offer to the Buddha, the monks, and the community without reservation. Why do the venerable ones test me?"

比丘言：「居士瞋耶？」

The monk said, "Is the householder angry?"

答言：「瞋。」

He replied, "Yes, I am angry."

比丘言：「若瞋者，我悔過。」

The monk said, "If you are angry, I repent."

居士言：「向世尊悔過。」

The householder said, "Repent before the World Honored One."

如喜優婆夷中廣說。

This is extensively explained in the Jivaka's story.



油熬魚子者，佛住舍衛城，爾時質帝隸居士作百味食請僧。
For anyone preparing fish roe in oil, while the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, at that time, the householder Jetṛhī invited monks for a meal made with a hundred flavors.

僧食訖，還精舍。
After the monks ate, they returned to the monastery.

居士勅家中婦兒言：「遺餘飲食料理，與諸比舍。我欲往問訊世尊！」
The householder ordered his family, saying, "Prepare the leftover food and distribute it to the neighbors. I wish to visit the World-Honored One!"

爾時六群比丘在祇洹門間俗論言話。
At that time, six groups of monks were gossiping at the entrance of Jeta's Grove.

居士見已，作是念：「此非毘尼人，設我不往彼或有恨。」
The householder saw them and thought, "These are not Vinaya practitioners, if I do not go, there may be regret."

即往和南問訊。
He then went to greet and pay respects.

比丘言：「善來檀越，如大龍象。」
The monks said, "Welcome, donor, like a great dragon and elephant."

居士問言：「尊者！今日我家中食不？」
The householder asked, "Venerable! Did you eat at my house today?"

答言：「往食。」
They replied, "Yes, we ate."

復問：「尊者！食適意不？」
He further asked, "Venerable! Was the meal to your satisfaction?"

答言：「善好！但少一種。」
They replied, "It was good! But lacked one thing."

問：「少何等？」
He asked, "What was lacking?"

比丘答言：「若得油鹽熬魚子者，便是名食，施主得好名譽。」
The monks replied, "If there was fish roe cooked in oil and salt, it would be considered a proper meal, and the donor would gain a good reputation."

居士言：「尊者！我先不知，若當知者應益多作，人與一鉢。」
The householder said, "Venerable! I didn't know before. If I had known, I would have prepared more and given you a bowl."

居士復言：「尊者！聽我說譬喻。過去世時有群雞依㮈林住，有狸侵食雄雞，唯有雌在後，烏來覆之，共生一子。」
The householder continued, "Venerable! Let me tell you a parable. In a past life, there was a flock of chickens living in a bamboo forest. A fox attacked and ate the roosters, leaving only the hens. A crow came to cover them, and together they gave birth to one chick."

子作聲時，翁說偈言：
When the chick made a noise, the old man recited a verse:




「這個孩子不是我親生的，　　」  
"This child is not my own,  

外父群中的母親，　

the mother from a group of outsiders,  



共合生兒子，　　
Together they gave birth to a child,

非烏復非雞。　　
Neither a crow nor a chicken.




若欲學翁聲，
If you want to imitate the voice of an old man,

復是雞所生，
It is still born of a chicken,




若欲學母鳴，
If you want to learn how the mother sings,

其父復是烏。
its father, too, is a crow.




學烏似雞鳴，
Learning to crow like a rooster,

學雞作烏聲，
Imitating the bird's sound like a chicken,




乌鸡二兼学， 

A person trying to combine two arts, 

是二俱不成。 

ends up mastering neither. 




「如是尊者，非是俗人，復非出家。」

"Thus, a respectable one, neither a layperson nor a monk."

比丘言：「居士瞋耶？」

A monk said: "Layperson, are you angry?"

答言：「瞋。」

He replied: "Angry."

比丘言：「瞋者，我悔過。」

The monk said: "If you're angry, I repent."

居士言：「向世尊悔過。」

The layperson said: "Repent to the World-Honored One."

六群比丘即往佛所，向佛悔過。

The six groups of monks then went to the Buddha and repented.

佛言：「何故悔過？」

The Buddha said: "Why do you repent?"

六群比丘以其上事具白世尊。

The six groups of monks reported the above matter fully to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「癡人！是質帝隸居士家中所有，於佛比丘僧無所匱惜，何故擾亂？」

The Buddha said: "Foolish people! This Chiti slave belongs to the layperson's house, but he has no shortage or regret towards the Buddha or the monks, so why disturb?"

佛告諸比丘：「是居士以宿命通，見六群比丘本昔時曾作雞烏子，是故作如是說。」

The Buddha told the monks: "This layperson, with the knowledge of past lives, saw that the six groups of monks were once chicks and crows, hence he spoke thus."

佛言：「僧應與六群比丘作俗人發喜羯磨。」

The Buddha said: "The Sangha should perform the act of rejoicing as laypeople for the six groups of monks."

如喜優婆夷中廣說。

As elaborated in the explanation for the joyful laywoman.



迦露者，佛住舍衛城，爾時有乞食比丘，時到著衣持鉢入城乞食，次到一家門。
At the time Kālu was in Śrāvastī where the Buddha resided, there was a monk begging for alms. He dressed himself, carried his bowl, and entered the city to beg for food, approaching a house door.

時夫在中庭坐，語婦言：「汝施出家人食。」
At that time, the husband was sitting in the courtyard and said to his wife, "You should offer food to the monk."

婦言：「何道出家？」
The wife asked, "Which sect has he left home for?"

夫言：「釋種出家。」
The husband replied, "He has left home for the Shakya clan."

婦言：「不與。」
The wife said, "I will not give."

夫言：「何故不與？」
The husband asked, "Why won't you give?"

婦言：「是人非梵行。」
The wife said, "This person does not practice noble conduct."

比丘言：「姊妹！我非是非梵行。」
The monk said, "Sister! I do not lack noble conduct."

婦人言：「尊者迦露尚不能修梵行，況汝能修梵行耶？」
The woman said, "Even the venerable Kālu couldn't practice noble conduct; how could you?"

比丘聞是語已，惆悵不樂，遂不乞食，於是而還坐禪。
Hearing this, the monk felt despondent and unhappy; thus, he did not beg for food, but returned to meditate.

晡時禪覺已，身極飢乏，往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面。
In the afternoon, after finishing his meditation, he was extremely hungry and weary. He went to see the Blessed One, bowed, and stood aside.

佛知而故問：「比丘何故飢色？」
The Buddha, knowing the situation, asked, "Monk, why do you look so hungry?"

白言：「失食。世尊！」
He replied, "I missed my meal, Blessed One!"

佛言：「汝不能乞食耶？」
The Buddha asked, "Weren't you able to beg for food?"

即以上事具白世尊。
Then, he explained the whole matter to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是迦露比丘於俗人間令發不喜，僧應與作俗人發喜羯磨。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "This monk Kālu is disliked by laypeople and should perform a ceremony to restore their joy."

如喜優婆夷中廣說，是名迦露。
As extensively explained in the 'Joy of Laywomen,' this is called the story of Kālu.



佛住舍衛城，爾時摩訶南釋種請僧施藥，時難陀優婆難陀聞已，自相謂言：「當往試之。」

In the city of Śrāvastī, Mahānāma from the Śākya clan invited the monks to receive medicine offerings. Upon hearing this, Nanda and Upananda said to each other, "Let's go test him."

到時著入聚落衣往到其家，共相問訊言：「我聞檀越請僧與藥。審爾不？」

When it was time, they dressed in their village robes and went to his house, and after greeting, said, "We heard the sponsor invited monks to give medicines. Is it true?"

答言：「爾！尊者欲須藥耶？」

He replied, "Yes! Venerables, do you need medicine?"

答言：「須爾許𤬪酥、爾許𤬪油、爾許𤬪蜜、爾許石蜜，爾許根藥、葉藥、華藥、菓藥。」

They replied, "We need so much ghee, so much oil, so much honey, so much rock sugar, and so much root medicine, leaf medicine, flower medicine, fruit medicine."

答言：「尊者！即日無爾許藥，須辦相與。」

He replied, "Venerables! On this day I don't have that amount of medicine, it needs to be prepared and provided."

六群比丘言：「異事！檀越先不儲藥而請比丘僧。汝不知耶？一比丘服藥，如雪山一大龍象食等。汝不欲施，但求名譽。」

The six monks said, "Strange! The sponsor invited the monks without preparing the medicine. Do you not know? A monk takes medicine like a great dragon elephant from the Snow Mountains eats. You are not willing to offer, but only seek fame."

彼言：「尊者！王家庫中尚無爾許藥，何況我家？須辦當與。」

He said, "Venerable! Even the king's treasury does not have that much medicine, let alone my house. It must be prepared to be given."

難陀言：「與以不與，自任汝意。」

Nanda said, "Whether to give it or not, it’s up to you."

作是語已，便出。居士後辦藥已，白言：「尊者！今可來取。」

Having said this, they left. After arranging the medicines, the layperson said, "Venerable! You may come and take it now."

彼聞已相視而笑。檀越嫌言：「何故試我，相視而笑？未辦之時，殷勤來索，今辦而不取。」

Upon hearing this, they looked at each other and laughed. The sponsor resented it, saying, "Why do you test me, look at each other, and laugh? When I hadn't prepared it, you insisted on requesting, and now it's ready and you don't take it."

難陀言：「檀越瞋耶？」

Nanda said, "Sponsor, are you angry?"

答言：「瞋。」

He replied, "Yes, I am angry."

「若瞋者，我悔過。」

"If you are angry, I repent."

答言：「向世尊悔過。」

He replied, "Repent before the World Honored One."

難陀即往佛所悔過。佛言：「何故悔過？」

Nanda immediately went to the Buddha to confess. The Buddha asked, "Why do you repent?"

即以上事具白世尊。

He recounted the whole matter to the World Honored One.

佛言：「癡人！是釋摩南家中所有，於佛比丘僧無所匱惜，何故擾亂？」

The Buddha said, "Foolish man! What's in Mahānāma's house is without lack or stinginess towards the bhikkhu sangha. Why cause disturbance?"

佛告諸比丘：「僧應與難陀作俗人發喜羯磨。」

The Buddha told the monks, "The sangha should perform a joyful act of karma for Nanda like with the laywomen."

如喜優婆夷中廣說，是名摩訶南。

As is elaborated in the narrative of Joyful Laywomen, this is called Mahānāma.


六群比丘者，佛住舍衛城，

The six groups of monks were living in the city of Savatthi.

爾時六群比丘在迦尸邑，

At that time, the six groups of monks were in the town of Kashi.

身非威儀、口非威儀、身口非威儀，

Their actions were undisciplined, their speech was undisciplined, and both their actions and speech were undisciplined.

身害、口害、身口害，

They caused harm through their actions, speech, and both together.

身邪命、口邪命、身口邪命，

They lived improperly through their actions, speech, and both together.

乃至發俗人不歡喜。

So much so that they caused laypeople to be displeased.

佛告諸比丘僧：

The Buddha addressed the assembly of monks:

「應與六群比丘作俗人發喜羯磨。」

"You should perform the formal act to make laypeople joyful for the six groups of monks."

如喜優婆夷中廣說，

As extensively explained in the Joyful Upasika text,

是名六群比丘。

This is in reference to the six groups of monks.

是謂發喜羯磨。

This is called the joyful formal act.



具足不名受，
Fullness does not mean acceptance,

支滿不清淨，
Accumulation is not purity,




羯磨及與事，
The karma and matters,

折伏不共語，
are subdued without words,




擯出發歡喜。  
Joy was exuded.

初跋渠說竟。  
Chubaqu finished speaking.




能协助满足该请求


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十四
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Volume 24




