inly, please provide the lines you would like translated


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律

【Scripture Information】Taisho Revised Tripitaka Volume 22 No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




版本记录

Version History

發行日期：2024-08

Release Date: 2024-08

最後更新：2024-07-12

Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯  

[Editing Instructions] This database is edited by the Foundation for the Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo".  




蕭鎮國大德提供

Provided by Venerable Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gyeya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain Venerable in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

New-style punctuation provided by Master Shi Benchán




#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

# 【Other Matters】This database is freely available for distribution. Please refer to the Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database for detailed information.




inly! Please provide the lines that you would like to have translated


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十七東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
The 27th volume of the Mahasanghika Vinaya, translated by the Indian Tripitaka master Buddhayaśas and Faxian during the Eastern Jin dynasty




明雜誦跋渠法之五
The fifth method of Ming miscellaneous chants and annotations




羯磨法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
As for the Kamma procedure, when the Buddha resided in the city of Sravasti, he elaborated as above.

爾時瞻波比丘諍訟相言不和合住。
At that time, the Bhikkhus of Jampa had disputes and did not live in harmony.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, because of this matter, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛語諸比丘：「從今日僧應羯磨，優波離為瞻波比丘斷當事。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "From today, the Sangha should hold a Kamma, and Upali should judge the matters for the Jampa Bhikkhus."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！長老優波離五法成就。
The one conducting the Kamma should say: "Noble Sangha, please listen! Elder Upali has fulfilled the five qualities.

若僧時到，僧拜長老優波離為瞻波比丘斷當事。白如是。」
If the time has come for the Sangha, they appoint Elder Upali to adjudicate the matter for the Jampa Bhikkhus. Thus it is declared."

「大德僧聽！長老優波離五法成就，僧今拜優波離為瞻波比丘斷當事。
"Noble Sangha, please listen! Elder Upali has fulfilled the five qualities, and the Sangha now appoints Upali to judge the matter for the Jampa Bhikkhus.

諸大德忍僧拜優波離為瞻波比丘斷當事忍者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
All noble ones who consent to appoint Upali to judge the matter for the Jampa Bhikkhus, remain silent. If not, please speak up. This is the first Kamma."

第二、第三亦如是。
The second and third are the same.

「僧已拜優波離為瞻波比丘斷當事竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has successfully appointed Upali to judge the matter for the Jampa Bhikkhus, and since the Sangha consented in silence, this matter is thus accepted."

羯磨法者有二十八白一羯磨，如前說。
There are twenty-eight single Kamma procedures, as previously stated.

八白三羯磨：拜斷事人、拜教誡比丘尼人、拜一月羯磨、
Eight threefold Kamma procedures: appointing the adjudicator, appointing the instructor for Bhikkhuni, appointing the one-month Kamma,

𥙡羯磨、癡羯磨、發露羯磨、覆鉢羯磨、拜學家羯磨，是名八白三羯磨。
Udissaka Kamma, Foolish Kamma, Patrasamvuta Kamma, overturned Kamma, appointing Kamma, these are called the eight threefold Kamma procedures.

是中拜斷事人、拜教誡比丘尼人，眾僧應求不離衣宿羯磨，
Among these, the appointment of the adjudicator and the instructor for Bhikkhuni requires the Sangha to request not to leave clothing for the night in the Kamma,

一月、𥙡羯磨，前人應從僧乞癡羯磨。
for a month, Udissaka Kamma, the preceding person should seek Kamma from the Sangha.

說他罪羯磨，是羯磨應內界僧現前作羯磨，非外界。
Announcing others' offenses Kamma, this Kamma should be conducted by the Bhikkhus present within the boundary, not externally.

學家羯磨、覆鉢羯磨，應界內僧現前作羯磨，非外界。
The Kamma for learners, and overturned Kamma, should be conducted by the Bhikkhus present within the community, not externally.

斷事人受拜已不得停住，若晨起受拜晡時應發，晡時受拜晨起應發。
The adjudicator, after being appointed, should not delay; if appointed in the morning, the matter should be resolved by afternoon, if appointed in the afternoon, it should be resolved by morning.

去時不得從檀越迂迴道，應從直道；若直道有難者迴道無罪。
When leaving, one should not take a roundabout way due to donors but should take a direct path; if there are difficulties on the direct path, there is no fault in taking a detour.

到彼已不得停住，待客比丘食。
Upon arriving, one should not linger, but wait for the guest Bhikkhu's meal.

若晡時到者晨起應斷，晨起到者晡時應斷，不得染衣、熏鉢、坐禪、誦經。
If arriving in the afternoon, it should be resolved by morning; if arriving in the morning, by afternoon, without dyeing robes, polishing bowls, practicing meditation, or reciting scriptures.

若事難斷，中間閑者作無罪。
If the matter is difficult to resolve, performing another task during the interval is not a fault.

斷事竟還亦如是，是名羯磨法。
Upon completion of adjudication, it is the same; this is called the Kamma procedure.



園田法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
When the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti, he expounded the laws of the land broadly as described above.

爾時諸比丘，以僧田地或借人、或賣、或自私受用。
At that time, some monks were borrowing, selling, or personally using communal land.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks, for this reason, went to inform the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「從今日後眾僧田地不得借人、不得賣、不得私受用，正使一切集僧亦不得借人、不得賣、不得私受用。
The Buddha told the monks, "From today onwards, communal land should not be borrowed, sold, or personally used, and even in gatherings of the Sangha, such actions are not permitted.

若集僧借人、賣、私受用者，越毘尼罪。」
If any gathering of the Sangha lends, sells, or personally uses the land, it is a breach of the Vinaya."

若園田地好，惡人欲侵者，得語檀越：「知是地。」
If the land is good and malicious people want to encroach upon it, you should inform the donor, "Be aware of this land."

若檀越言：「此是好園田，何故知？」
If the donor says, "This is good land, why should I know this?"

應答言：「此園田雖好，惡人欲侵，任檀越轉易。」
You should answer, "Although this land is good, malicious people wish to encroach upon it; it is up to the donor to change it."




復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, and elaborated as above.

爾時僧地、王地、並王地入僧地中。
At that time, the land of the monks and the land of the king overlapped into the land of the monks.

時王波斯匿語尊者阿難言：「王地入僧地中，可持繩來共分地。」
Then King Prasenajit said to Venerable Ānanda: "The king’s land has entered the monks’ land, could you bring a rope for us to demarcate the land?"

阿難答言：「須我白佛。」
Ānanda replied: "I must consult the Buddha."

阿難以是事往白世尊。
Ānanda went to inform the Bhagavān about this matter.

佛語阿難：「汝往語王：『王是地主，沙門釋子依王而住，不應共王分地。』」
The Buddha said to Ānanda: "You should go and tell the king: 'The king is the landowner, and the Śramaṇa sons of Shakya reside depending on the king, so they should not divide the land with the king.'"

阿難受教，即詣王所作是言：「佛語大王：『王是地主，沙門釋子依王而住，不得與王分地。』」
Ānanda, having received the instruction, went to the king and said: "The Buddha told the great king: 'The king is the landowner, and the Śramaṇa sons of Shakya reside depending on the king, so they cannot divide the land with the king.'"

王言：「若然者，一切並施與僧。」
The king said: "If that is the case, all of it will be donated to the monks."

今日故名王園，後人得知。
Today it is therefore called the King's Garden, for future generations to know.



衛城，廣說如上。  
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in the city of Śrāvastī and extensively explained as above.  

爾時僧有空地，時有長者來問：「是誰空地？」  
At that time, the monks had an empty land, and an elder came to ask, "Whose empty land is this?"  

答言：「是僧地。」長者言：「若僧地者可與我，我欲為僧作房。」  
They replied, "It is the monks' land." The elder said, "If it is the monks' land, you may give it to me. I wish to build a house for the monks."  

僧即與，經久不作。  
The monks agreed and gave it to him, but for a long time, nothing was built.  

復有一居士問言：「是誰空地？」  
Later, a layperson asked, "Whose empty land is this?"  

答言：「僧地。」居士言：「可與我，我欲為僧作房。」  
They replied, "It is the monks' land." The layperson said, "You may give it to me. I wish to build a house for the monks."  

比丘答言：「本已有長者索，但不作。」  
The monk replied, "Originally an elder requested it, but nothing was built."  

居士言：「尊者但與我，何憂不作？」  
The layperson said, "Venerable, just give it to me, why worry that it won't be built?"  

比丘即與。居士為功德，傾家財寶作好房舍，辦種種飲食供養眾僧，即以房舍施僧。  
The monk then gave it to him. The layperson, to earn merit, spent his wealth to build a beautiful house, arranged various foods and offerings for the monks, and then donated the house to the monks.  

復請前長者來共隨喜，長者見已問言：「尊者！是誰作房？」  
Then he invited the former elder to rejoice together. The elder, upon seeing it, asked, "Venerable, who built the house?"  

答言：「某甲居士。」  
The reply was, "A certain layperson."  

長者言：「此地已先與我，何故復與居士？」  
The elder said, "This land was already given to me. Why was it given to the layperson again?"  

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。  
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.  

佛言：「何故不先作要持地與他？  
The Buddha said, "Why was no prior agreement made to hold the land for him?"  

從今日後不聽應不先作要持地與人。  
From today onward, it is not allowed to give land without first making an agreement.  

僧有空地，若人來索與僧作房者，應先與要齊幾時得作？  
If there is empty land belonging to the monks and someone comes wanting to build a house for the monks, they should first specify the time frame.  

若前人言：『齊爾許時作。』應語言：『若爾許時不作者，當更與餘人。』  
If the prior person says, 'I will build within such a time,' it should be said, 'If you do not build within that time, it will be given to someone else.'  

若二人俱索，一人言：『我為眾僧作一重閣。』  
If two people both request and one says, 'I will build a single-story pavilion for the monks,'  

一人言：『我作二重閣。』僧應與二重者。  
and the other says, 'I will build a double-story pavilion,' the monks should give it to the one proposing the double-story.  

如是三、四重乃至七重。  
Similarly for three, four up to seven stories.  

若俱言作七重者，爾時當相望其人，應與能成辦者。  
If both say they will build seven stories, then at that time, consider the person and give it to the one who can accomplish it.  

若二人俱能成辦，應與眷屬多者。  
If both can accomplish it, it should be given to the one with more followers.  

若不先作要與地者，越毘尼罪。」  
If an agreement is not made before giving the land, it is a violation of the Vinaya.


復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha was staying in Shravasti and broadly expounded as above.

爾時比丘於僧地中作草屋，時上座來次第付房，此比丘不與。
At that time, a monk built a straw hut in the monastic area. When the senior monk came according to order to allocate the dwelling, this monk did not give it.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Because of this matter, the other monks went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「若僧地中作房，上座來次第不與者，應持草木更餘處去。
The Buddha told the monks, "If a dwelling is built in the monastic area and the senior monk comes in order to allocate it and is not given it, you should remove the grasses and woods and relocate them elsewhere.

若僧地中作房，上座來不次第與者，越毘尼罪。」
If a dwelling is built in the monastic area and is given to a senior monk not according to order, it violates the Vinaya."



田宅法者，若眾僧有好田宅貴價，與惡人隣接，欲侵欺者，得語檀越：「知是田宅。」
Regarding the rules for property, if monks have a valuable property that is adjacent to a malicious person who may want to exploit it, it is permissible to tell the donor: "Be aware of this property."

若檀越言：「此貴價田宅，何故欲知？」
If the donor says, "Why do you want to know about this valuable property?"

應語言：「此田宅雖好，惡人隣接，常欲侵奪。」
You should say, "Although this property is good, it is next to a malicious person who often desires to seize it."

若言：「欲轉易耶？」
If asked, "Do you want to transfer it?"

答言：「任檀越知。」
Answer, "It's up to you, the donor."

若檀越轉易者無罪。是名田宅法。
If the donor decides to transfer it, there is no fault. This is called the rule for property.



僧伽藍法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The rules of the monastery were established when the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, elaborated as above.

爾時比丘逼僧伽藍作房，舊知事人語言：「長老！莫逼僧住處起房。」
At that time, a monk pressured the monastery to build a room, and the old steward said, "Elder! Do not build a room in the dwelling place of the monks."

此比丘言：「長老！我為僧作房，莫於中作障礙。」
This monk said, "Elder! I am building a room for the monks, do not create obstacles within it."

二人共諍不解，遂至佛所，以上事具白世尊。
The two could not resolve their dispute and went to the Buddha to report the matter in detail.

佛言：「從今日後不得逼僧舊住處為僧作房，舊比丘亦不得於中作障礙。
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, no one should pressure to build a room in the old dwelling place of the monks, and old monks should not create obstacles within.

若二知事比丘意相得者，得共一覆別障、別覆共障、共覆共障、別覆別障。
If the intentions of the two stewards match, they may share a cover with separate enclosures, separate covers with shared enclosures, shared covers with shared enclosures, or separate covers with separate enclosures.

若二人不相憙者，別覆別障作。
If the two people do not agree, they should create separate covers and enclosures.

若逼舊房為僧作屋者，越毘尼罪。
If someone pressures to use the old room to build a house for the monks, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

為僧作房於中障礙者，亦越毘尼罪。
Creating obstacles in the room built for the monks is also a violation of the Vinaya."




復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Later, when the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti, he spoke extensively as above.

爾時比丘多人行處起聲聞塔，諸居士來欲禮拜世尊，
At that time, many monks were building a stupa for the disciples in a public area, and laypeople came wanting to pay respects to the Buddha.

見已嫌言：「來欲禮拜世尊足，未見世尊先見死人塚。」
Upon seeing this, they complained, "We came to pay respects to the Buddha, but now we see a cemetery for the dead first."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Buddha.

佛告諸比丘：「汝云何多人行處先不羯磨地而起聲聞塔？
The Buddha said to the monks, "Why did you choose a public place without first performing the formal act to build a stupa for the disciples?

從今日後不聽多人行處先不羯磨地而起聲聞塔，
From today, you are not allowed to start a stupa for disciples in a public area without performing the ceremony.

應當先作求聽羯磨。」
You should first initiate a formal request and perform the ceremony.

羯磨人應作是說：
The person conducting the ceremony should say:

「大德僧聽！
"Venerable Sangha, listen!

某甲比丘無常若般泥洹，
Such and such monk has passed away.

若僧時到，
If the time for the Sangha has arrived,

僧某甲比丘無常若般泥洹，
the monk, such and such, has passed away.

於此處起聲聞塔。
A stupa for disciples should be built at this place.

諸大德僧聽某甲比丘於此處起聲聞塔，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
Venerable Sangha, listen, a stupa for such and such monk should be built at this place, silence implies consent, thus this matter is held."

若不和合者應語：「長老！世尊說四人應起塔起相輪懸施幡蓋，
If there is no consensus, one should say: "Elder, the Buddha said that a stupa with a noble appearance and flags should be established for four types of people:

如來、聲聞、辟支佛、轉輪聖王是。
The Tathagata, disciples, Pratyekabuddhas, and the Wheel-turning Sage King are these.

無常比丘若是須陀洹應語須陀洹、
If a deceased monk was a Stream-Enterer, you should say Stream-Enterer.

斯陀含、阿那含、阿羅漢應語阿羅漢。」
Once-Returner, Non-Returner, and Arahant, you should say Arahant."

若言：「持律。」
If you say, "Keeper of the Vinaya."

若言：「法師。」
If you say, "Master of the Dharma."

若言：「營事。」
If you say, "Manager of affairs."

德望比丘應語：「長老！是人持戒賢善，
A respected monk should say, "Elder, this person was virtuous and good in keeping precepts.

多供養僧，執事有勞應與起塔。」
They often supported the Sangha and took on responsibilities, so they should have a stupa."

如是語已當為起塔。
Having said this, you may proceed to build the stupa.

作聲聞塔，不得先見塔後見世尊，
When constructing a stupa for disciples, it should not be visible before seeing the Buddha.

當令先見世尊後見塔，
One should see the Buddha first and then the stupa.

不得在多人行處當在屏處，
It should not be in a public path but in a secluded place.

不得在比丘經行處。
It should not be in the path where monks walk.

若多人行處起聲聞塔者，越毘尼罪。
If a stupa for disciples is built in a public area, it is a violation of the Vinaya precepts.



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Moreover, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, elaborating as above.

爾時尊者迦露，在迦尸耆梨大邑住。
At that time, the Venerable Kalara was residing in the great city of Kasi.

時有上座比丘來次第付房而不肯與，
Then a senior monk came, following the order, to occupy a room but refused to share it,

瞋恚捉钁自斲房破。
In anger, he took a hoe and destroyed the room himself.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊：「此比丘犯何等罪？」
The monks, due to this incident, went to the World-Honored One and asked, "What offense did this monk commit?"

佛言：「破六種得偷蘭遮。何等六？
The Buddha said, "Breaking any of the six things incurs a 'Sthanadaya' offense. Which six?

破鉢、破衣、破塔、破房、破僧、破界。」
Breaking a bowl, breaking a robe, breaking a stupa, breaking a room, breaking the Sangha, and breaking a boundary."

破鉢者，鉢有三種上、中、下。
As for breaking a bowl, bowls can be of three kinds: superior, medium, inferior.

若一一瞋恚破者，得偷蘭罪。
If one breaks each type in anger, it results in a Sthanadaya sin.

若鉢破欲綴，誤鑽破者無罪。
If one wants to repair a broken bowl and accidentally breaks it further, there is no sin.

若拘鉢多羅鍵鎡，瞋破者，得越毘尼罪。
If one breaks a Patra lock in anger, it incurs a transgression of monastic discipline.

破衣者，三衣中若一一衣瞋裂者，得偷蘭罪。
For breaking a robe, if one angrily tears any of the three robes, it results in a Sthanadaya sin.

若欲易邊著中、中著邊、若補作兩重，無罪。
If one wants to change the edge to the middle, the middle to the edge, or mend by doubling, there is no sin.

若尼師壇及餘種種衣瞋裂破，越毘尼罪。
If one angrily tears and breaks a Nisidana or various other robes, it incurs a transgression of monastic discipline.

破塔者，若瞋恚破世尊塔者，得偷蘭罪，業行罪報多。
Breaking a stupa, if one angrily breaks a World-Honored One's stupa, it incurs a Sthanadaya sin with many karmic consequences.

若欲治更作好者，無罪。
If one wants to improve or repair it, there is no sin.

若尼揵塔及餘外道塔瞋恚破者，越毘尼罪。
If one angrily breaks a Nigantha's stupa or other non-Buddhist stupas, it incurs a transgression of monastic discipline.

破房者，瞋恚破僧房者，偷蘭罪。
For breaking a room, if one angrily breaks a Sangha room, it incurs a Sthanadaya sin.

若欲更好作者無罪。
If one wants to make it better, there is no sin.

若瞋恚破外道僧房者，越毘尼罪。
If one angrily breaks a non-Buddhist monastic room, it incurs a transgression of monastic discipline.

破僧者，瞋恚破和合僧，偷蘭罪，業行果報一劫泥梨中。
For breaking the Sangha, if one angrily breaks the harmony of the Sangha, it is a Sthanadaya sin with karmic retribution in hell for one kalpa.

破界者，若瞋恚過界作不名作，偷蘭罪。
For breaking a boundary, if one in anger transgresses a boundary without a valid reason, it is a Sthanadaya sin.

得捨界已更羯磨界，是名破六種偷蘭罪。
Having abandoned a boundary and re-established a Karmavachana boundary, this is termed the breaking of the six Sthanadaya sins.



卫城，广说如上。
Then Buddha was residing in Shravasti, speaking at length as above.

爾時尊者羅睺羅跋耆國遊行，漸漸至波羅柰林聚落。
At that time, the Venerable Rahula was traveling in the Vajji region, gradually reaching the village of Varanasi.

此聚落中有一居士，為羅睺羅起房。
In this village, there was a layperson who built a dwelling for Rahula.

羅睺羅受已復遊行，是居士以此房更施餘比丘。
After Rahula accepted it and moved on, the layperson gave this dwelling to another monk.

羅睺羅還，如線經中廣說。
Rahula returned, as explained in detail in the sutra.

乃至羅睺羅白佛言：「世尊！此房誰應得？」
Rahula asked the Buddha, "World-Honored One, who should rightfully receive this dwelling?"

佛語羅睺羅：「若居士居士兒信心歡喜作房施僧，施僧已還轉施眾多人，是非法施、非法受用。」
The Buddha said to Rahula, "If a layperson or their children joyfully build a dwelling with faith and offer it to the sangha, then later give it to many individuals; it is an improper offering and improper use."

若施眾多人已還轉與一人，是非法施、非法受用。
If one gives it to many individuals and later to one person, it is an improper offering and improper use.

若施一人已轉與眾多人、若施众多人已转与众僧，是非法施、非法受用。
If it was given to one person who then gives it to many, or from many to the entire sangha, it is an improper offering and improper use.

施僧已不轉與眾多人、施眾多人已不轉與一人，是名如法施、如法受用。
If, having been offered to the sangha, it is not transferred to many, or from many not transferred to one, it is called a proper offering and proper use.

佛語羅睺羅：「前與者是施，後與者非施。」
The Buddha said to Rahula, "The initial giver is the one who offers, the subsequent ones are not."

是王地依止住是中前，作前施，功德日夜增長。
On this king's land, the initial offerer stays; by making the initial offering, their merit grows day and night.

羅睺羅！汝應得房，後者不應得。
Rahula, you should receive the dwelling; the later one should not.

是名僧伽藍法。
This is called the monastic rule.



營事法者，佛住王舍城，廣說如上。

Regarding the matter of building, the Buddha stayed in Rajagaha and elaborated as above.

如尊者達膩迦瓦師子作房，如第二波羅夷中說，乃至作是嫌言：「我辛苦作房，不避寒暑作房纔成，上座已奪，如猫伺鼠。」

As Venerable Danika's lion building process is described in the second Parajika, he complained, "I worked hard to build the house, braving the elements, and just completed it, now the elder has taken it away, like a cat watching a mouse."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

Because of this situation, the monks went to report to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「是營事比丘作房甚苦，應羯磨與營事比丘五年住。」

The Buddha told the monks, "The task of building for the monks is arduous, a formal Sangha act should allow the monk who built it to live there for five years."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘欲為僧作房。」

The one performing the Sangha act should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! A certain monk wishes to build a house for the Sangha."

若僧時到，僧某甲營事比丘為僧作房，欲從僧中乞五年住。

If the time for the Sangha has come, this monk wishes to build for the Sangha and asks for a five-year stay.

「諸大德聽某甲營事比丘欲從僧乞五年住，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

"Venerable ones, listen! If the Sangha consents through silence, this matter is held as such."

是比丘應乞，偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，作是言：「大德僧聽！我某甲比丘為僧作房，今從僧乞營事五年住。哀愍故！惟願僧與我營事五年住。」

The monk should request by baring his right shoulder, kneeling with palms together, and say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! I, a certain monk, have built a house for the Sangha, and now request a five-year residential entitlement."

如是三乞。

Such a request should be made three times.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘為僧作房，已從僧乞五年營事住。

The one performing the Sangha act should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! A certain monk has built a house for the Sangha and has requested a five-year stay.

若僧時到，僧與某甲比丘五年營事住。白如是。」

If the time has come, let the Sangha grant him a five-year stay. Thus I declare."

「大德僧聽！某甲比丘為僧作房，已從僧乞五年營事住。

"Venerable Sangha, listen! A certain monk, having built a house for the Sangha, has requested a five-year residence.

僧今與某甲比丘營事五年住。諸大德忍僧與某甲比丘營事五年住者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」

The Sangha now grants him a five-year stay. If among you venerables, those who agree remain silent, if any do not, speak now. This is the first formal act."

第二、第三亦如是說。

The second and third declarations are made similarly.

「僧已與某甲比丘五年營事住竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Once the Sangha has granted a five-year residence to the monk, if all remain silently consenting, this matter is confirmed as such.

僧已羯磨與五年住，還得自所作房，復應次第得僧房。

The Sangha, having formally granted a five-year residence, allows the monk to possess the house he built, and sequentially gain access to Sangha property.

若有上座來，次第得者應與，羯磨得者不應與。

If an elder arrives, the sequentially obtained residence can be given, but not the one obtained by formal act.

若欲遊行者，是二房應付僧隨次第住：「我來時當還取。」

If someone wishes to leave, the two properties should be available for the Sangha to reside sequentially: "When I return, I shall reclaim."

後來時從前日令滿。

Upon return, the prior arrangements should be reinstated.

若先是僧房破壞，更易戶向二年、三年，隨功夫多少，應羯磨與住。

If the original Sangha property becomes ruined, requiring changing, extending for two or three years depending on the work, it should be formally granted for residing.

若空房不任住，治事者應與一時住。

If an unoccupied house is unsuitable for staying, the manager should grant temporary residence.

若床机、枕褥垢膩破更浣染補治事者，應與一時住。

If a bedstead or cushions are sullied and broken, the offerings should be washed, dyed, and repaired, and the facilities should grant temporary residence.

若中間比丘嫌者，越毘尼罪，是名營事法。

If there are complaints among the monks, it constitutes a Vinaya offense; this is called the Building Law.



床褥法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Regarding the rule of mattresses, when the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, he elaborated as above.

爾時比丘安居中間，上座來隨次第取房，比丘運輦出房。
At that time, during the monks' residence, a senior arrived to take a room in order, and the monk moved out of the room.

佛知而故問比丘：「是客比丘耶？」
The Buddha, knowing this, intentionally asked the monk, "Is this a visiting monk?"

「非也。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「是去比丘耶？」
"Is it a departing monk?"

「非也。世尊！」
"No, World-Honored One!"

「是何等比丘運輦？」
"What kind of monk is moving out?"

答言：「世尊！隨次第取房，是故運徙。」
The reply was, "World-Honored One, following the order to take a room, thus we moved."

佛告諸比丘：「汝等云何一切時隨上座次第起？
The Buddha told the monks, "How can you always move following the senior's order?

從今日後不聽一切時隨上座次第起。
From today onwards, it is not allowed to move at all times following the senior's order.

僧應拜成就五法人知付房舍床褥。
The assembly should appoint someone who has fulfilled the five qualities to manage the allocation of rooms and mattresses.

何等五法？不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡、知得不得，是名五。」
What are the five qualities? Not adhering to desire, not adhering to anger, not adhering to fear, not adhering to ignorance, knowing what can and cannot be done, these are called the five."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘五法成就。
The person performing the Kamma should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! Monk so-and-so has accomplished the five qualities.

若僧時到，僧拜某甲比丘典知付房舍床褥。白如是。」
When the time comes, the assembly appoints monk so-and-so to manage the allocation of rooms and mattresses. Proclaim thus."

「大德僧聽！某甲比丘五法成就，僧今拜典知付房舍床褥。
"Venerable Sangha, listen! Monk so-and-so has achieved the five qualities, the assembly now appoints him to manage the allocation of rooms and mattresses.

諸大德忍僧拜某甲比丘典知付房舍床褥忍者默然。若不忍者便說。」
All venerables who agree with appointing monk so-and-so to manage the allocation of rooms and mattresses should remain silent. If there is disagreement, please speak."

「僧已忍拜某甲比丘典知付房舍床褥竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The assembly has agreed to appoint monk so-and-so for the management of rooms and mattresses, thus it is established as such because the assembly is silent."

羯磨已，從三月十六日已去，應語檀越浣治床褥、房舍、治禪坊、講堂、溫室、廁屋、治門屋、井屋、僧伽藍所有及齋日飲食，安居衣應一一條疏。
After the Kamma is completed, from the sixteenth day of the third month onwards, patrons should be instructed to clean and arrange the mattresses, rooms, meditation halls, lecture halls, warm rooms, toilet rooms, gatehouses, well houses, all the properties of the monastery, as well as prepare the meals for fasting days, and provide the residence clothing, each should be listed.

若城邑聚落僧住處遠者，至四月十三日應付房。
If the monks' residences in villages or towns are far away, the allocation should be done by the thirteenth of the fourth month.

若不相容受者得餘處去。
If not accommodated, they should go to other places.

若住處相近者，十五日應付房，應眾僧中讀此疏：「某甲僧伽藍，有爾許房舍、爾許床褥、爾許齋日飲食、爾許衣。」
If the residence is nearby, the allocation should be done by the fifteenth day, and this notice should be read in the assembly: "At such-and-such monastery, there are so-many rooms, so-many mattresses, so-many fasting day meals, and so-many clothing."

上座應語：「付房舍共一安居施。」
The senior should say, "Allocate the rooms for joint residence."

作是語已應付房舍，不得與沙彌房。
After saying this, the rooms should be allocated, but not given to novices.

若和上、阿闍梨言：「但與房舍，我自料理。」得與。
If the preceptor or teacher says, "Just give the room, I will arrange it myself," it is allowable to give.

若房舍多者，一人與兩房。
If there are many rooms, one person can be given two rooms.

若不肯取兩：「我正得一房足。」
If one refuses to take two: "One room is sufficient for me."

爾時應語：「是不為受用故與，為治事故與。」
At that time, it should be said, "It is not given for usage, but for management."

若比丘多、房舍少者，應兩人三人共與一房。
If there are many monks and few rooms, two or three people should share one room.

若故不足，應五人、十人共與一房。
If still insufficient, five or ten should share one room.

若正有一大堂者，一切比丘應入中住。
If there is a large hall, all monks should live together in it.

上座應與臥床，餘者與坐床。
The senior should have a bed for lying down, and others should have beds for sitting.

若故不足者，上座與坐床，餘者敷草蓐。
If still insufficient, the senior takes a sitting bed, and others spread grass mats.

若故不足者，上座敷草蓐，餘者跏趺坐。
If still insufficient, the senior spreads grass mats, and others sit cross-legged.

若復不足者，上座跏趺坐，餘者立住。
If still insufficient, the senior sits cross-legged, and others stand.

若復不足者，上座立，餘者出外樹下、若空地。
If still insufficient, the senior stands, and others go outside under trees or open spaces.

若冬時付房舍，治事故與，受用故與，若上座來隨次第住。
If rooms are allocated in winter, they are given for management and usage, and if senior monks come, they should live according to order.

春時付房舍，治事故與、受用故與，若上座來隨次第住。
In spring, when rooms are allocated, they are given for management and usage, and if senior monks come, they should live according to order.

安居時付房舍，治事故與、受用故與，上座來不應次第住。
During the residence period, rooms are allocated for management and usage, and senior monks should not take residence according to order.

若比丘不知法，安居中索次第房，不得即嫌，應語：「住！須我問知房舍人。」
If a monk does not know the rule and requests a room in order during residence, they should not be rebuked immediately, but told, "Wait, I must ask the person in charge of room allocation."

應語知房人言：「長老！有客比丘上座來語我起。」
The person in charge should be told, "Elder, a visiting senior monk has asked me to move."

知房人應呵責言：「長老！汝不善知戒相。
The person in charge should rebuke, "Elder, you do not understand the rules well.

云何安居中起他？汝不知耶？不得一切時驅他起。」
How can you make others move during residence? Do you not know? It is not allowed to make others move at all times."

若冬春上座來次第應起，不起者，越毘尼罪。
In winter or spring, if senior monks come, one should follow the order; if not, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

若比丘不善知戒相，安居時驅他起者，越毘尼罪。
If a monk does not understand the precepts well and makes others move during the residence period, it is a violation of the Vinaya.

是名床褥法。
This is called the rule of mattresses.



恭敬法者，佛拘薩羅國遊行。
Those who respect the Dharma, the Buddha was traveling in the Kosala country.

世尊初夜為聲聞說法，中夜自還房。
In the first part of the night, the World-Honored One preached the Dharma to the disciples and returned to his room at midnight.

爾時諸比丘，有供給人先為取房，聽法已各到房眠。
At that time, some monks who had attendants obtained rooms first, and after hearing the Dharma, each went to their rooms to sleep.

爾時尊者舍利弗、目連無供給人。
At that time, the Venerables Sāriputta and Moggallāna did not have attendants.

初夜聽法已，中夜到房撓戶。
After listening to the Dharma at the beginning of the night, they reached the room and knocked on the door at midnight.

問言：「是誰？」
They asked, "Who is it?" 

答言：「是舍利弗。」
The reply was, "It's Sāriputta."

「房已滿。大智！」
"It's full. Great Wisdom!"

復有撓戶，問言：「是誰？」
There was another knock on the door, and they asked, "Who is it?" 

答言：「我是大目連。」
The reply was, "I am Mahā Moggallāna."

「房已滿。大神足！」
"It's full. Great Divine Feet!"

二人不得房已，一人在屋檐下坐、一人在樹下坐。
The two of them, unable to get a room, one sat under the eaves, and the other sat under a tree.

時天夜雨，檐下坐者說是偈言：
When it rained at night, the one sitting under the eaves recited this verse:



檐下跏趺坐，   
Sitting cross-legged under the eaves,  

屋漏兩膝頭；  
The roof leaks on both knees;




已得安樂住，
Now attained peaceful dwelling,

當斷後邊身。
One should cut off future rebirths.




樹下坐者，說是偈言：
The one sitting under the tree, recited these verses:




樹下知止足，
Under the tree, knowing to stop at enough,

乞食草蓐坐，
Begging for food, sitting on the grass mat,




是二不貪著，  
This is the second, do not be greedy,

當斷後邊身。  
Cut off the attachment behind one's body.




時有優婆塞，晨起來欲禮覲世尊，見已嫌言：

At that time, a lay follower rose in the morning intending to pay respects to the World-Honored One, and upon seeing him, disapproved, saying:

「云何沙門釋子無恭敬法，如是大德人而不與房住？」

"How is it that the Shramanas, sons of the Shakya, have no respect, such a great person not having a living place?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks took this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「是正應為世人所嫌。」

The Buddha said, "This indeed should be disapproved by the world."

佛告諸比丘：「待我拘薩羅國遊行還舍衛城，語我：

The Buddha told the monks, "When I return from traveling in the Kosala country to the city of Shravasti, remind me:

『當為諸比丘制恭敬法。』

'I shall establish rules of respect for the monks.'"

還已，諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

Upon returning, the monks took this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「誰應最上坐、先取水、先受食？

The Buddha told the monks, "Who should sit in the highest seat, take water first, receive food first?

誰應受禮？誰應起迎？誰應合掌低頭恭敬？」

Who should be saluted? Who should rise to greet? Who should join palms and bow respectfully?"

或有比丘言：「世尊子應受。」

Some monks said, "The sons of the World-Honored One should receive it."

有比丘言：「世尊親里應受。」

Other monks said, "The relatives of the World-Honored One should receive it."

復有言：「世尊侍者應受。」

Yet others said, "The attendants of the World-Honored One should receive it."

復有言：「阿羅漢應受。」

And still others said, "The Arhats should receive it."

剎利出家者言：「剎利應受。」

Those who renounced from the Kshatriya class said, "The Kshatriyas should receive it."

婆羅門出家者言：「婆羅門應受。」

Those who renounced from the Brahmin class said, "The Brahmins should receive it."

毘舍出家者言：「毘舍應受。」

Those who renounced from the Vaishya class said, "The Vaishyas should receive it."

首陀羅出家者言：「首陀羅應受。」

Those who renounced from the Shudra class said, "The Shudras should receive it."

佛告諸比丘：「汝等各各長慢故作是語，

The Buddha told the monks, "Each of you speaks thus due to your pride,

與世尊子乃至首陀羅，非是人法。

from the sons of the World-Honored One to the Shudras, this is not the righteous law."

如來、應供、正遍知當為汝等說人法。」

The Tathagata, Worthy of Offerings, the Perfectly Enlightened One, will teach you the law of respect."

如線經中廣說。

As extensively expounded in the Sutra of the Thread.

乃至佛告諸比丘：「從今日後制戒，

Then the Buddha told the monks, "From today onwards, I establish the precept:

先出家者應受禮起迎合掌低頭恭敬，

Those who first ordained should receive greetings, attend with palms joined and head bowed in respect,

先出家者應作上座，應先受請、先坐、先取水、先受食。」

Those who first ordained should sit in the highest seat, be first invited, first seated, first to take water, and first to receive food."

諸比丘歎言：「世尊能讚說應恭敬長老。」

The monks exclaimed, "The World-Honored One is capable of praising the veneration of elders."

佛言：「不但今日能讚說恭敬長老，過去世時已曾如是。」

The Buddha said, "Not only today can I praise the veneration of elders, but it has been so in past lives."

諸比丘白佛言：「願欲聞之。」

The monks said to the Buddha, "We wish to hear about this."

佛告諸比丘：「乃往過去久遠世時，

The Buddha told the monks, "In a past distant aeon,

有三獸巔多鳥、獼猴、象，共在尼拘類樹下。

there was a bird, a monkey, and an elephant, together under a nyagrodha tree.

象言：「我等三類共在一處，此中誰大？誰應受恭敬？」

The elephant said, 'The three of us are here together, among us who is the greatest? Who should receive respect?'

象言：「我曾騎此樹過。」

The elephant said, 'I have passed riding on this tree.'

獼猴言：「我本曾尿此樹上。」

The monkey said, 'I once urinated upon this tree.'

鳥言：「我本雪山下噉此菓來，放糞於此，遂生此樹。」

The bird said, 'I ate the fruit that came from the base of the snowy mountains and defecated here, hence this tree grew.'

爾時鳥最大，二獸恭敬鳥故，命終皆生善處。

At that time, the bird was the greatest, and the two beasts respected the bird, hence after death, they were both reborn in good places.

爾時象者我身是。汝等應恭敬上座，如是毘尼得增長。」

At that time, the elephant was my previous life. You should respect the elders and thus the Vinaya grows."

是名恭敬法。

This is called the Law of Respect.




初受請者，有人來請，應先請上座。
Firstly, when someone invites, you should first invite the superior monk.

若檀越未曾為福，請年少比丘者，應語上座處，是名初受請。
If the donor has never performed meritorious deeds and invites a young monk, you should inform the superior monk; this is known as the initial invitation.




在上座坐者，敷座時不得使年少座高、上座座卑，

When preparing seats, do not let younger ones sit higher than senior ones.

應當上座座高、年少座卑。

Seniors should sit higher, youths lower.

當令齊整正直坐具，好者應與上座，不好者與下座。

Seats should be arranged neatly and evenly; better ones for seniors, lesser for juniors.

若檀越家請為知識比丘敷好床褥者，不得諍，從施主意。

If a patron requests fine seats for eminent monks, do not argue, follow the host's intention.

若五年大會時，眾人猥多，下至上座八人應當如法敷座，

In large gatherings every five years, seats for up to eight seniors should be arranged properly.

下座隨宜，是名上座坐法。

Seats for juniors are arranged as appropriate; this is called the seating rule for seniors.




先受食者，行食時，應先與上座。
To those who have taken food beforehand, when offering food, it should first be given to the senior.

若檀越未曾設福，先與年少者，應當語上座處：「行飯時應取好者與上座。」
If the supporter has not yet arranged offerings and gives first to the younger one, he should tell the senior, "When serving food, take the good portion and give it to the senior."

如是行一切飲食時，應教好者與上座。
Thus, during all meals, those of better quality should be given to the senior.

若檀越家請食時，差別與者，從施家意，不得與諍。
When invited to a meal at a house of supporters, distinction should be made according to the host's intention without contention.

若五年大會時，眾人猥多，從上座下至八人應與好者，下座隨宜與之。
If during the quinquennial great assembly, when there is a large gathering, from the senior down to the eighth person, the better portions should be given, while others may be served as appropriate.

是名先受食。
This is called "Receiving food first."



禮拜恭敬起迎低頭合掌者，爾時禮膝禮脛，

For those who respectfully bow their heads and press their palms together, there was bowing to knees and shins at that time.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後應當禮足。」

The Buddha said, "From this day on, you should bow to the feet."

時諸比丘從他索足作禮，擾亂修行者。

Then the monks sought feet from others for worship, disturbing practitioners.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後當口說和南。」

The Buddha said, "From this day on, you should verbally say 'Homage'."

時比丘調戲故作是言：「和南尊者。和南尊者！」復擾亂他。

Then, the monks playfully said, "Homage, venerable one. Homage, venerable one!" and disturbed others.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後和南有三種：身、口、心。

The Buddha said, "From this day on, there are three types of homage: body, speech, and mind.

身者，前人若坐、若立住，頭面禮足，是名身。

Body means when the person before you sits or stands, you bow your head to the feet, that is called body homage.

口者，若前人遠遙，合掌低頭作是言『和南』，是名口。

Speech means when the person before you is distant, you press your palms together and bow your head, saying 'Homage', that is called speech homage.

心者，若以背去，應合掌作敬，是名心恭敬。

Mind means when turning away, you should press your palms together as a sign of respect, that is called mind homage.

若見上座來，不起迎和南恭敬者，越毘尼罪。」

If you see a senior coming and do not arise to pay homage respectfully, that is a transgression of the discipline."

是名恭敬上座法。

This is called the rule for respecting seniors.




举他及治罪、
Punish him and hold him accountable,

驱出并异住、
Expel and relocate him,




僧断事田地，
The monk decided to deal with the land,

僧房拜五年、
In the monk's dwelling, he paid respects for five years,




床褥恭敬法。  
Reverence in using bedding.

是名三跋渠。  
This is called the three-way channel.



布薩法者，佛住王舍城，廣說如上。
As for the practice of Uposatha, the Buddha resided in the city of Rajagaha and explained extensively as above.

爾時九十六種出家人皆作布薩，時比丘不作布薩，為世人所嫌：「云何九十六種出家人皆作布薩，而沙門釋子不作布薩？」
At that time, ninety-six kinds of monastic renunciates observed Uposatha, but the monks did not, which led to criticism from people: "How is it that ninety-six types of renunciates observe Uposatha, but the disciples of the Shakya do not?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
Due to this situation, the monks approached the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「正應為世人所嫌。從今日後應作布薩。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "Indeed, it is right for people to criticize. From today onwards, you should observe Uposatha."




所謂偈、

So-called verses,

十四日十五日、

Fourteenth day, fifteenth day,

示布薩、

Show the Uposatha,

晝日布薩、

Daytime Uposatha,

堂、

Hall,

賊、

Thief,

王、

King,

阿那律、

Aniruddha,

二種數、

Two types of enumeration,

不利、

Unfavorable,

不一切利、

Not all beneficial,

順逆、

Forward and backward,

欲聞初、

Desire to hear the beginning,

未受具足人，

People not yet fully ordained,

太早說、

Speak too early,

一住處、

One dwelling place,

二眾、

Two assemblies,

二已說二未說、

Two already spoken, two not yet spoken,

與欲、

Give desire,

取欲、

Take desire,

與欲多、

Give much desire,

等欲、

Equal desire,

瞿師羅、

Koshala,

大愛道、

Mahāmaudgalyāyana,

闡陀、

Chunda,

病、

Sickness,

阿練若、

Aranya,

不應與而與、

Should not give but gives,

阿脂羅河、

Ajira River,

十一事不名與欲轉欲、

Eleven matters not called giving or turning desire,

宿、

Abide,

界外、

Outside the realm,

比丘尼、

Bhikkhuni,

未受具足、

Not yet fully ordained,

持欲出、

Carry out with desire,

與欲出、

Give out desire,

取欲已還戒、

Receive desire and return precepts,

與欲已還戒、

Give desire and return precepts,

失欲、

Lose desire,

壞眾、

Disrupt the assembly,

四布薩、

Four Uposatha days,

四說、

Four discourses,

七事應語遮、

Seven matters should be verbally prohibited,

二事應語遮。

Two matters should be verbally prohibited.




偈者，佛告比丘：「毘婆尸佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『忍辱第一道，涅槃佛稱最，出家惱他人，不名為沙門。』

The Buddha told the monks: "The Vipasyin Buddha, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'The path of patience is foremost, Nirvana is praised by the Buddha, one who disturbs others is not called a monk.'

第二尸棄佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『譬如明眼人，能避嶮惡道；世有聰明人，能遠離諸惡。』

The second Buddha, Sikhin, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'Just as a person with clear vision can avoid dangerous paths, so does a wise person avoid all evil.'

第三毘鉢施佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『不惱不說過，如戒所說行；飯食知節量，常樂在閑處，心淨樂精進，是名諸佛教。』

The third Buddha, Visvabhu, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'Do not disturb or speak of faults, act as prescribed by the precepts; know moderation in food, delight in solitude, purify the mind and be diligent—this is the teaching of the Buddhas.'

第四拘留孫佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『譬如蜂採花，不壞色與香，但取其味去。比丘入聚落，不破壞他事，不觀作不作，但自觀身行，諦視善不善。』

The fourth Buddha, Krakucchanda, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'Just like a bee gathering nectar does not harm the color or fragrance of flowers, monks entering a village should not disturb things, not concern themselves with whether deeds are being done or not, but only observe their own actions, discerning good from evil.'

第五拘那含牟尼佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『欲得好心莫放逸，聖人善法當勤學；若有智寂一心人，爾乃無復憂愁患。』

The fifth Buddha, Kanakamuni, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'To develop a good mind, do not be heedless, diligently study the methods of the sages; if someone is wise and of single mind, then there will be no more sorrow or trouble.'

第六迦葉佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『一切惡莫作，當具足善法，自淨其志意，是則諸佛教。』

The sixth Buddha, Kashyapa, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'Do no evil whatsoever, fully cultivate good practices, purify your will and mind—this is the teaching of the Buddhas.'

第七釋迦牟尼佛、如來、應供、正遍知，為寂靜僧最初說波羅提木叉：『護身為善哉，能護口亦善，護意為善哉，護一切亦善。比丘護一切，便得離眾苦，比丘守口意，身不犯諸惡，是三業道淨，得聖所得道。』

The seventh Buddha, Shakyamuni, the Tathagata, the worthy of offerings, the perfectly enlightened, first taught the Pratimoksha to the silent monks: 'Guarding the body is good, guarding the mouth is also good, guarding the mind is good, guarding everything is good. When a monk guards everything, he escapes all suffering. When a monk restrains mouth and mind, his body does not commit evil. This purifies the three actions and leads to the attainment of the sacred path.'

」是名偈布薩。

This is called the Verse of Uposatha.




十四日十五日者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
On the fourteenth and fifteenth day, the Buddha resided in Shravasti City and expounded broadly as mentioned above.

爾時尊者阿難共行弟子欲行摩那埵，
At that time, Venerable Ananda, along with other disciples, wished to do Uposatha.

白佛言：「世尊！我共行弟子，欲詣聚落中小住處行摩那埵，時是十四日。」
They said to the Buddha: "World Honored One! Together with other disciples, we wish to go to a small dwelling in the village for Uposatha, as it is the fourteenth day."

佛語阿難：「此十四日星宿隨順、時隨順、眾隨順，應作布薩竟然後去。」
The Buddha said to Ananda: "This fourteenth day is aligned with the stars, the time is suitable, and the assembly is harmonious, so you should complete the Uposatha first and then go."

十四日者，冬第三布薩第七布薩、春第三第七、夏第三第七。
The fourteenth day refers to the third and seventh Uposatha in winter, and the third and seventh in spring and summer.

十五日者，十八布薩。
The fifteenth day refers to the eighteenth Uposatha.

一歲中二十四布薩，六、十四日、十八、十五日，是名十四日、十五日布薩。
There are twenty-four Uposatha days in a year, on the sixth, fourteenth, eighteenth, and fifteenth days, called the fourteenth and fifteenth Uposatha.



示布薩者，佛住王舍城耆闍崛山中，爾時諸比丘不知布薩處，或得布薩、或不得布薩。

At that time, the Buddha was residing on Vulture Peak Mountain in Rajagaha, and the monks did not know the place for the Uposatha, so some either performed the Uposatha or did not.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。

The monks, for this reason, went to inform the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「耆闍崛山應羯磨，示作布薩處。」

The Buddha said to the monks, "On Vulture Peak Mountain, the procedures should be carried out to designate a place for the Uposatha."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！於是處，若僧時到，僧從今日耆闍崛山某處常作布薩。白如是。」

The appointed person should say, "Venerable Sangha, listen! At this place, if the assembly time arrives, the Sangha should henceforth always perform the Uposatha at a certain location on Vulture Peak Mountain. This is stated thus."

「大德僧聽！於是處，僧今耆闍崛山某處常作布薩。諸大德忍某處常作布薩，忍者默然，若不忍便說。」

"Venerable Sangha, listen! At this place, the Sangha now always performs the Uposatha at a certain location on Vulture Peak Mountain. Those who agree to always do so, remain silent; if you do not agree, speak out."

「僧已忍某處常作布薩竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

"Since the assembly has agreed to always perform the Uposatha at this location, and since they remain silent, this matter is thus settled."

是名示作布薩處。

This is known as the designation of a Uposatha place.




晝日布薩者，佛住王舍城耆闍崛山中，爾時諸比丘夜作布薩，道嶮倒地劣極而來。
During the day of Uposatha, the Buddha resided in Vulture Peak in the city of Rajagaha, and at that time, the monks performed Uposatha at night, enduring difficult paths and arriving in an exhausted state.

以是因緣往白世尊：「得晝日布薩不？」
Due to this reason, they approached the Blessed One and asked, "Is it permissible to hold Uposatha during the day?"

佛言：「得。」
The Buddha said, "It is permissible."

若晝日布薩、若僧遠住者，應唱：
If Uposatha is held during the day, and if monks reside far away, it should be announced:

「諸長老！今日僧十四日、若十五日，若食前、若食後，
"Venerable elders! Today is the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the sangha, whether before or after the meal,

爾許人影應集某處，若講堂、禪坊、溫室、樹下。
all such persons should gather at a certain location, whether a lecture hall, meditation hall, warm room, or under a tree.

若不唱者，越毘尼罪。」
Failure to announce this constitutes an offense against the Vinaya."

是名晝日布薩。
This is called day Uposatha.



堂者，佛住王舍城，爾時阿闍貰王耆闍崛山作布薩堂，種種嚴飾作金蓮葉鍱，僧坐後世尊已坐。
The hall, Buddha dwelt in the city of Rajagriha, at that time King Ajatasatru built a Uposatha hall with various adornments and golden lotus leaves, after monks were seated, the Blessed One also sat.

諸比丘悉入欲作布薩，有金華鍱墮地，有惡比丘盜心取挾腋下。
All the monks gathered for the Uposatha; a golden flower plate fell to the ground, an evil monk took it with a thieving heart and hid it under his armpit.

佛比丘僧坐久不作布薩，時尊者阿難從坐起偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，白佛言：「世尊！初夜已過，僧坐疲久，唯願世尊為諸比丘說波羅提木叉作布薩。」
The Buddha and monks sat for long without performing the Uposatha. Then Venerable Ananda rose from his seat, bared his right shoulder, knelt with palms together, and said to the Buddha, "Blessed One, the first watch has passed, the monks are weary from sitting long, I wish the Blessed One would recite the Patimokkha to perform the Uposatha for the monks."

時世尊默然。如是中夜乃至後夜，復白佛言：「世尊！明相已出，眾僧坐久，唯願世尊說波羅提木叉作布薩。」
The Blessed One remained silent. At midnight and even into the latter part of the night, Ananda again said, "Blessed One, dawn has appeared, the assembly of monks has sat long, I wish the Blessed One would recite the Patimokkha to perform the Uposatha."

佛告阿難：「眾不清淨。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "The assembly is not pure."

爾時尊者大目連作是念：「為誰故世尊說眾不清淨？」
At that time Venerable Mahamaudgalyayana thought, "For whom did the Blessed One say the assembly is not pure?"

目連即入定，觀見是惡比丘斂身眾中而坐。
Maudgalyayana entered meditation, observed, and saw the evil monk concealing himself among the assembly.

見已即從坐起，往到其所，左手擒牽至戶，右手推出，說是言：「惡比丘！從今日汝非沙門、非比丘，不復得在眾中。」
Seeing this, he rose from his seat, went over, grabbed him with his left hand, dragged him to the door, pushed him out with his right hand, and said, "Evil monk! From today you are not a recluse, not a monk, you will no longer be among the assembly."

驅出已，佛言：「自今已後不聽曳人。」
After expelling him, the Buddha said, "From now on, dragging people out is not allowed."

佛語阿難：「從今日後汝等當自說波羅提木叉。何以故？如來、應供、正遍知，眾不清淨不得為說。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "From today, you should recite the Patimokkha yourselves. Why? For the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One does not speak when the assembly is impure."

佛告阿難：「如來法律中猶如大海，有八未曾有，如線經中廣說，我諸弟子見已生愛樂心。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "In the Tathagata's Dharma, like the great ocean, there are eight unprecedented qualities, as broadly explained in the sutras, that my disciples see and delight in."

是名堂。
This is called the hall.



賊者，

A thief,

說他未來擁有的一切，

said he had everything he could ever want in the future,

於是他離開了家。

so he left home.




佛住王舍城耆闍崛山，

The Buddha was residing on Vulture Peak at Rajagaha.

爾時諸比丘作布薩，

At that time, the monks were holding an Uposatha ceremony,

說波羅提木叉，至波夜提，

reciting the Pātimokkha, reaching the Pācittiya section,

後跋渠截已、波夜提破已、波夜提挽出已，

after "severed at the root," "broken back," and "pulled out," in the Pācittiya,

波夜提當誦時賊來，

when reciting the Pācittiya, a robber came,

誦人默然，賊立須臾便出，

and the reciters fell silent; the robber stood for a moment then left,

復重誦，如是至三。

and they recited again, and this happened three times.

賊作是念：「此是惡沙門，

The robber thought: "These are evil ascetics,

作是說：『截已、破已、挽已，波夜提。』

saying, 'severed, broken, pulled out, Pācittiya.'

正當截我、破我、挽我等耳！」

They mean to sever me, break me, pull me out!"

即便入打諸比丘。

He then entered and beat the monks.

諸比丘心生疑惑：「賊前得說戒不？」

The monks were puzzled, "Can precepts be spoken in front of a robber?"

以是因緣往白世尊。

Because of this event, they went to report to the Blessed One.

佛言：「賊是林中王，

The Buddha said, "The robber is king of the forest,

能作不饒益事，得說。

capable of doing harm, you are allowed to speak.

汝等云何重誦本語？

Why do you repeatedly recite the original text?

從今日後不聽若比丘布薩說波羅提木叉時，

From today onwards, when during an Uposatha a robber enters,

賊入者即應更誦餘經，

you should recite a different scripture instead,

若《波羅延》、若《八跋耆經》、若《牟尼偈》、若《法句》。

such as the Pāra, the Aṭṭhakavagga, the Munisutta, or the Dhammapada.

若賊知比丘法，

If the robber knows the monks' practices,

作是言：『沙門我已知，但說先所誦。』者，

and says, 'I know this monk's law, just recite what you were reciting before,'

爾時比丘應急誦，使章句不辨，

then the monks should recite quickly, making the passage indistinct,

令彼不知初中後。

so that he cannot discern the beginning, middle, or end.

若更誦本語，越毘尼罪。」

If they recite the original text again, it is a Vinaya violation."

是名賊。

This is called a robber.



王者，佛住王舍城，耆舊菴婆羅園，如《沙門果線經》中廣說。
The monarch, the Buddha resided in the city of Rajagriha at the ancient Bamboo Grove Monastery, as extensively discussed in the Samaññaphala Sutta.

乃至比丘生疑：「得王前說戒不？」
Until a monk doubts, "Can we explain the precepts before the king?"

以是因緣往白世尊。
For this reason, he approached the Blessed One.

佛言：「王者能作不饒益事。」
The Buddha said, "The monarch can act in ways that are not beneficial."

如上賊中廣說，是名王。
As extensively discussed above among thieves, this is called a king.



阿那律者，佛住王舍城耆闍崛山，諸比丘作布薩羯磨時，尊者阿那律不來。
Aniruddha, when the Buddha was staying at Grdhrakuta Mountain in Rajagriha, and the monks practiced the recitation of the monastic code, the venerable Aniruddha did not come.

諸比丘遣使往喚長老阿那律：「比丘僧集欲作布薩羯磨事。」
The monks sent a messenger to call the elder Aniruddha, saying, "The community of monks is gathering to perform the recitation."

答言：「世尊說清淨是布薩，世間清淨者我即是，我不去。」
He replied, "The World-Honored One said that purity is the recitation, and I am pure in this world, so I won't go."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「汝往喚來，莫用天眼來。」
The Buddha said, "Go and call him, but don't use celestial vision."

是長老失肉眼故，涉山嶮道極苦乃到。
Because the elder had lost his physical eyesight, he endured extreme hardships crossing mountain paths to arrive.

佛語阿那律：「汝不恭敬布薩，誰當恭敬？」
The Buddha said to Aniruddha, "If you do not honor the recitation, who should?"

佛言：「從今日後布薩時盡應來，若不來、若病不與欲，越毘尼罪。」
The Buddha said, "From today forward, you should always come for the recitation. If you don't come, or if you are ill and don't seek permission, you transgress the Vinaya."

是名阿那律。
This is known as Aniruddha.



二種數者，佛語優波離：「汝誦毘尼不？」

The Buddha said to Upāli: "Do you recite the Vinaya?"

答言：「誦，但雜碎句難持。」

He answered, "I recite it, but the scattered phrases are difficult to retain."

佛言：「當作籌數誦。」

The Buddha said, "You should use a counting method to recite it."

時優波離即作籌數誦。

At that time, Upāli immediately used the counting method to recite.

佛復問優波離：「汝作籌數誦毘尼不？」

The Buddha asked Upāli again, "Do you use the counting method to recite the Vinaya?"

答言：「雜碎句籌數誦猶故難持。」

He answered, "Even with the counting method, the scattered phrases are still difficult to retain."

佛言：「從今日後作二種數：一者五百，二者七百。

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, make two types of counts: one is five hundred, the other is seven hundred.

若欲誦時應先淨洗手已，捉籌下至數齊五，猶當洗手，

If you wish to recite, you should first wash your hands clean, hold the counts down to a consistent five, and still wash your hands,

若有者應作香汁浴籌，餘人欲捉籌者亦復如是。」

if possible, you should use fragrant liquid to cleanse the counter; others who wish to hold the counter should do the same."

是名二種數。

This is called the two types of counts.



不利者，佛住舍衛城，爾時聚落中有比丘住，僧集欲作布薩羯磨，語上座言：「說波羅提木叉。」
At that time, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, there was a monk living in a village, and the assembly wanted to perform the Uposatha ceremony, saying to the senior monk, "Recite the Pratimoksha."

答言：「我不利。」
He replied, "I am incompetent."

如是第二、第三，乃至下座亦復如是。
This happened in the same way for the second, third, and even the junior monks.

諸比丘心生疑惑，以是因緣往白世尊。
The monks became doubtful and approached the Buddha with this matter.

佛言：「從今日後受具足已，應誦二部毘尼。」
The Buddha said, "From today, after receiving full ordination, one should recite the two sections of the Vinaya.

若不能誦二部者，應誦一部；
If unable to recite two sections, recite one section;

若復不能者，應誦五線經；
If still unable, recite the Five-Stanza Sutra;

若復不能者，應誦四、三、二、一。
If further unable, recite four, three, two, or one stanza.

布薩時，應廣誦五綖經，
During the Uposatha, one should extensively recite the Five-Strand Sutra,

若有因緣不得者，應誦四、三、二、一，
If circumstances prevent, recite four, three, two, or one stanza,

乃至四波羅夷及偈餘者僧常聞。
Up to the extent of the four Parajikas and the verses that monks usually hear.

若不誦作布薩者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not recite during Uposatha, it is a breach of the Vinaya.

若如是比舉眾不利者，應遣上座出界外，心念口言：『作布薩。』
If such incompetent officiants are found, send the senior monk outside the boundary, mentally and verbally saying, 'Perform Uposatha.'

餘三人界內作，三語：『布薩。』即是罰上座。
The remaining three inside the boundary say three times, 'Uposatha.' This becomes a penalty for the senior monk."

是名不利。
This is called incompetence.




不一切利者，

Those who do not profit from everything,




佛住舍衛城，爾時聚落中有比丘住，僧集欲作布薩，語上座：「誦波羅提木叉。」
The Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, at that time there was a monk living in a village, and the monks gathered wishing to perform Uposatha, saying to the elder: "Recite the Pātimokkha."

答言：「我一篇利。」復語第二上座，答言：「我二篇利。」
He replied: "I am proficient in one section." Then they spoke to the second elder, who replied: "I am proficient in two sections."

如是次第各誦一篇利，即便遞誦。
Thus, in sequence, each recited their section proficiently, and then recited in turn.

共作布薩已心生疑惑，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
Having conducted the Uposatha together, doubts arose in their minds, and the monks reported this matter completely to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽合誦作布薩。
The Buddha said: "From today onward, combined recitation for Uposatha is not allowed.

若有如是比者，應共授一聰明者使利已令誦。
If there are such monks, they should select a wise one among them to be proficient and let him recite."

若誦時忘者，餘人得授，若合誦作布薩者，越毘尼罪。
If one forgets while reciting, another may be assigned; if they perform Uposatha by combined recitation, it is a transgression against the Vinaya."

是名不一切利。
This is called Not Complete Proficiency.



順逆者，佛住舍衛城，爾時有比丘聚落中住，僧集作布薩。
In the matter of reciting in order and in reverse, the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī, and at that time there was a monk living in the village who gathered with the Sangha to perform the Uposatha ceremony.

有一比丘誦波羅提木叉利，順逆誦，從戒序乃至法隨順法，從法隨順法乃至戒序。
A monk recited the Pātimokkha in both the correct order and reverse order, proceeding from the precept sequence to conformity with dharma and from conformity with dharma back to the precept sequence.

布薩已心生疑悔，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
After the Uposatha was completed, he felt doubt and regret, and the monks reported this matter fully to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽逆誦，應順誦。
The Buddha said, "From this day forward, reverse recitation is not allowed; it should be recited in the correct order.

若誦時有忘失者，得還補誦。
If there is an omission during recitation, one may recite again to complete it.

順逆誦作布薩者，越毘尼罪。」
If one performs the Uposatha with a reverse recitation, it is a transgression of the Vinaya."

是名順逆。
This is known as the matter of reciting in order and in reverse.



欲聞初者，佛住舍衛城，爾時諸比丘僧集作布薩，誦波羅提木叉，乃至法隨順法。
The beginning of the story is that the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, at which time monks gathered to perform the Uposatha ceremony and recited the Patimokkha, up to the extent of the rules conforming to the Dharma.

時客比丘來言：「長老！我在聚落中住，未曾聞廣誦波羅提木叉，願長老為我廣誦。」
At that time, a visiting monk said, "Elder! I live in a village and have never heard the extensive recitation of the Patimokkha. I wish you could recite it for me."

誦者即為更從戒序，乃至法隨順法。
The reciter then proceeded according to the order of precepts, up to the extent of the rules conforming to the Dharma.

諸比丘心生疑惑，以是因緣，具白世尊。
The monks were puzzled and because of this matter, they reported everything to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「汝等云何為欲從初聞者更誦？從今日後不聽。
The Buddha said, "Why do you wish to recite again for those who want to hear it from the beginning? This will not be allowed from today onward.

若比丘僧集作布薩，誦波羅提木叉，乃至法隨順法，有客比丘來及坐者，即名得布薩。
If the monks gather to perform the Uposatha ceremony, reciting the Patimokkha up to the extent of the rules conforming to the Dharma, and a visiting monk comes and sits, it is said that he has partaken in the Uposatha.

若客比丘言：『我聚落中住，未曾聞廣誦波羅提木叉，願為我廣誦。』待僧罷已然後與誦。
If a visiting monk says: 'I live in a village and have never heard the extensive recitation of the Patimokkha. I wish for it to be recited for me,' he should wait until the assembly is dismissed, and then the recitation can be done.

若僧未罷為誦者，越毘尼罪。」
If the recitation is done before the assembly is dismissed, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

是名欲聞初。
This is so-called "desiring to hear from the beginning."



未受具足者，
Those who have not received it fully,




佛住舍衛城，爾時比丘為未受具足人說五眾罪，波羅夷乃至越毘尼罪。
When the Buddha stayed in Sravasti, a monk was explaining the five groups of offenses, from Parajika to transgression of the Vinaya, to those who had not yet fully ordained.

後比丘入聚落中，俗人言：「長老！汝犯波羅夷罪乃至越毘尼罪。」
Later, the monk entered the village and the laypeople said, "Elder! You have committed offenses from Parajika to transgression of the Vinaya."

諸比丘聞已慚愧，以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks felt ashamed upon hearing this and reported the incident to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「汝等云何為未受具足人說波羅提木叉五篇罪？
The Buddha said, "Why do you explain the five sections of offenses of the Pratimoksha to those not yet fully ordained?

從今日後不聽向未受具足人說，得教語：『汝不得作非梵行、不得盜、不得殺生、不得妄語。』
From now on, you are not allowed to speak of these to those not fully ordained, but you can teach them: 'Do not engage in unchaste conduct, do not steal, do not kill, do not lie.'

如是比得為說。
This is how you should explain it.

若為未受具足人說波羅提木叉五篇名者，越毘尼罪。」
If you mention the five sections of the Pratimoksha to those not fully ordained, it is a transgression of the Vinaya."

是名未受具足人。
This refers to those who have not yet fully ordained.




太早者，佛住舍衛城，爾時有一比丘在聚落中住，

Long ago, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, there was a monk living in a village,

晨起作布薩竟，有客比丘來語舊比丘言：「長老！來共作布薩。」答言：「我已布薩竟。」

who performed the Uposatha ceremony at dawn. A visiting monk approached and said to the resident monk, "Elder! Come, let's perform the Uposatha together." The resident monk replied, "I have already completed the Uposatha."

客比丘言：「長老！作布薩乃太早。」比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The visiting monk said, "Elder! It seems you performed the Uposatha too early." The resident monk reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後不應早作布薩。若一比丘聚落中住者，布薩日應掃塔及僧坊，

The Buddha said, "From this day forth, one should not perform the Uposatha too early. If a monk is living within a village, on the day of Uposatha, they should clean the stupas and monastery,

中若有者，香汁灑地散華然燈，待客比丘來共作布薩。

and if available, sprinkle scented water on the ground, scatter flowers, light lamps, and wait for visiting monks to join in the Uposatha.

若無客比丘來，有罪者應作是念：『若得清淨比丘，此罪當如法除。』

If no visiting monks come, one who has committed an offense should think: 'If I find a pure monk, this offense can be rightly absolved.'

作是念已，應心念口言：『今十五日僧作布薩，我某甲比丘清淨受布薩。』如是三說。

Having this thought, they should mentally and verbally declare: 'Today, as the Sangha performs the Uposatha, I, Bhikkhu So-and-So, receive the Uposatha in purity.' Say this three times.

若布薩竟，有客比丘來者，應隨喜言：『長老！已作布薩，我某甲隨喜。』

If after completing the Uposatha a visiting monk arrives, one should express joy by saying: 'Elder! The Uposatha has been completed, I, So-and-So, rejoice.'

若不隨喜，應出界外作布薩。若晨朝作布薩，越毘尼罪。」

If one does not rejoice, they should go to an area outside and perform the Uposatha. If one performs the Uposatha at dawn, it is a violation of the Vinaya."

是名太早。

This is called performing too early.



一住處者，佛住舍衛城，爾時諸比丘道路行，天陰闇謂日暮，入聚落至比丘住處作布薩。
Once, the Buddha was residing in Śrāvastī. At that time, some monks were traveling along the road, and, thinking that it was evening due to the cloudiness, they entered a village and performed the Uposatha ceremony at the monks' residence there.

布薩已天晴，日故早，諸比丘作是念：「我應前行。」
After the Uposatha, the weather cleared up, and the day was still early. The monks thought, "We should continue on our journey."

去已，須臾第二眾來，復於此處作布薩。
They left, and shortly afterwards, another group of monks arrived and performed the Uposatha at the same location.

即於中宿，明日去，與前布薩比丘相見。
They stayed the night there, and the next day, they encountered the monks who had conducted the first Uposatha.

見已謂言：「長老！汝昨何處宿？」
Upon meeting, they said, "Elder! Where did you stay yesterday?"

答言：「某處。」
The reply was, "At such and such a place."

「何處布薩？」
"And where did you perform the Uposatha?"

答言：「某處。」
The answer was, "At such and such a place."

「我亦彼處作布薩。」
"We also performed the Uposatha at that place."

諸比丘心生疑惑，以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks were puzzled by this and reported the matter in full to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後一住處不得再作布薩。
The Buddha said, "From today onward, the Uposatha should not be performed twice in one location.

若比丘遠行，布薩日入聚落至比丘住處，作布薩已不得默然去，
If a monk is traveling and, on the day of the Uposatha, enters a village to perform the ceremony, he should not leave silently after it is done.

應囑沙彌、若園民、若放牧者：『若有比丘來語令知，此中已作布薩。』
He should inform a novice, a gardener, or a herdsman, saying, 'If any monks come, let them know that the Uposatha has already been performed here.'

若無人者，應書柱戶扇、若散華作相，
If there is no one available, he should write on a doorpost, place petals, or leave some sign.

若後來者應問、應求相，不得輒作布薩。
Those who arrive later should inquire and look for a sign; they must not perform the Uposatha without checking.

若前人不囑不作相，後人不問不求相，俱得越毘尼罪。」
If the former group does not instruct or leave a sign, and the latter does not inquire or seek a sign, both commit an offense against the Vinaya."

是名一住處。
This is called a single residence.



眾者，二眾客比丘來，一眾十四日布薩，一眾十五日布薩，應從誰？
When two groups of guest monks arrive, one group practices the Uposatha on the fourteenth day, the other on the fifteenth day, whom should one follow?

從前入者。
Follow the one who entered first.

二眾同時入，應從上座。
If both groups enter at the same time, follow the senior monk.

若無大小，應從持律。
If there is no seniority, follow the one who holds the precepts.

若俱持律，應從先發聲者。
If both uphold the precepts, follow the one who speaks first.

若十四日、若十五日，應從布薩。
Whether it is the fourteenth day or the fifteenth day, follow the Uposatha.

是名二眾。
This is called the two groups.



二已說、二未說者，客比丘來，客比丘十四日布薩，舊比丘十五日。
Those who have said it and those who haven't, the visiting monk arrives, the visiting monk observes Uposatha on the fourteenth day, the resident monk on the fifteenth day.

舊比丘語客比丘：「長老！共作布薩來。」
The resident monk says to the visiting monk, "Elder! Let's observe Uposatha together."

客比丘不得言：「我已作布薩。」與和合、若出界外。
The visiting monk cannot say, "I have already observed Uposatha." They must be in harmony or be outside the boundary.

若舊比丘十四日，客比丘十五日。
If the resident monk observes on the fourteenth day, the visiting monk on the fifteenth day.

客比丘言：「長老！作布薩來。」
The visiting monk says, "Elder! Let's observe Uposatha."

舊比丘應言：「我已作布薩。」
The resident monk should say, "I have already observed Uposatha."

是客比丘應隨喜言：「長老！已作布薩，我隨喜。」
The visiting monk should joyously say, "Elder! You have observed Uposatha, I rejoice."

若不隨喜，應出界外作布薩。
If not joyously, they should go outside the boundary to observe Uposatha.

是名二已說、二未說。
This is what is called having said it twice and not said it twice.



與欲者，眾僧集布薩，

Those who wish, the monks gather for confession,

時有比丘為衣鉢事不得往。

But some monks could not attend due to clothing and bowl affairs.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks reported this matter to the Buddha.

佛言：「從今已後聽與欲。

The Buddha said, "From now on, it is permitted to grant permission.

與欲法者，應作是言：

Those granting permission should say:

『長老聽！今日僧布薩，

'Elder, listen! Today the monks are confessing,

若十四日、十五日，

Whether on the fourteenth or fifteenth day,

我比丘某甲與清淨布薩欲，為我說。』

I, monk so-and-so, grant pure confession permission, say it for me.'

如是三說。

Say it thus three times.

與欲時不得趣與人，

When granting permission, do not approach individuals,

應與能持欲入僧中說者。

Grant it to those capable of entering the community to speak.

若作衣鉢事布薩時不與欲者，

If during clothing and bowl affairs confession is not granted,

越毘尼罪。」

It is a transgression of the Vinaya."

是名與欲。

This is called granting permission.




住舍衛城，爾時比丘僧集作布薩羯磨，比丘病，為衣鉢事與欲，比丘不受。

Regarding the practice of seeking permission, when the Buddha stayed in the city of Shravasti, at that time the monks gathered to perform the recitation ceremony, and a monk was sick; for the purpose of a robe or bowl, permission was given, but the monk did not accept it.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今已後應取欲，若取欲時應自思惟能傳欲不？

The Buddha said: "From now on, permission should be sought. When seeking permission, one should consider whether they can convey permission or not.

不得取眾欲，得至三人。

Permission should not be sought from the entire assembly, but up to three people is permissible.

與欲時，應作是說：『長老憶念！

When granting permission, one should say: 'Please remember, venerable!

今日僧作布薩，某甲比丘與布薩清淨欲。』

Today, the monks are performing the recitation ceremony, and such-and-such a monk requests permission for the pure observance.'

若忘字者憶歲數，應言：『爾所歲比丘。』

If one forgets the words, they should recall the number of years and say: 'A monk of such-and-such a number of years.'

若客言客、若病言病，比丘與布薩清淨欲。

If a guest or a sick person, state that they are a guest or sick, the monk grants permission for the pure observance.

若病為衣鉢事與欲，不取者，越毘尼罪。」是名取欲。

If a sick person is given permission for a robe or bowl and does not accept it, it is an offense of transgression against the Vinaya." This is called seeking permission.



欲多者，佛住舍衛城

At that time, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti.

爾時比丘僧布薩，時與欲者多、集者少。

At that time, the Bhikshu assembly was conducting a Uposatha, with many willing ones and few gathered.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks fully explained this situation to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今已後不聽與欲者多、集者少作布薩，作者越毘尼罪。」

The Buddha said: "From now on, it is not permitted to conduct a Uposatha with many willing ones and few gathered; those who do will commit an offense against the Vinaya."

是名與欲多。

This is what is called having many willing ones.



欲等者，佛住舍衛城，爾時比丘僧布薩。
Those who have desires, when the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, the monks at that time were assembling for Uposatha.

時與欲比丘與集者等作布薩。
At that time, they performed Uposatha together with monks who had desires and those who assembled.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊，佛言：「從今已後不聽欲等作布薩，應集者多。
The monks, due to these circumstances, informed the World-Honored One, and the Buddha said, "From now on, those who have desires are not allowed to perform Uposatha unless the assembly is large.

若等欲作布薩者，越毘尼罪。」
If those with desires perform Uposatha, it constitutes a violation of the Vinaya."

是名欲等。
This is called "those with desires."



瞿師羅者，佛住俱睒彌瞿師羅園，爾時比丘僧集作布薩，斷事羯磨語聲高。
The story of Qu Shi Luo: When the Buddha was residing in the Jushi Luo Garden at Kushambi, at that time the monks gathered to perform observance, and their voices were loud during the resolution of karma matters.

時瞿師羅居士來入，僧默然，須臾還出，僧復斷事高聲如前，如是至三。
Then, the householder Qu Shi Luo came in, and the monks fell silent. After a while, he left, and the monks again resumed their loud discussion as before, repeating this three times.

居士作是念：「我入便默，我出便高聲。我今當入更不復出。」如瞿師羅問尊者阿難，如《六入線經》中廣說。
The householder thought, "When I enter, they go silent, and when I leave, they speak loudly. I will now enter and not come out again." As Qu Shi Luo asked Venerable Ananda, as elaborated in the Sutra of Six Entries.

爾時諸比丘心生疑惑，以是因緣具白世尊。
Then the monks became puzzled and presented the matter in detail to the Blessed One.

佛言：「如是大德勝人欲聽眾僧斷事者，得聞斷事，若眾中有辯才能語使事相分明者說。
The Buddha said: "If such a noble person wishes to listen to the resolution of matters by the assembly of monks, he is allowed to hear it, and if someone among the assembly has the discernment and eloquence to make the matters clear, let them speak.

若凡庶人前斷事者，越毘尼罪。」是名瞿師羅居士。
If they resolve matters in front of laypeople, it is a violation of the Vinaya precepts." This is the account of the householder Qu Shi Luo.



大愛道者，佛住舍衛城，爾時大愛道瞿曇彌與欲，比丘不受。
The one called Mahāprajāpatī was living in Śrāvastī when she wished to give a gift to a monk, but the monk did not accept it.

時大愛道瞿曇彌往到世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，以是因緣具白世尊：「比丘不受我欲，誰當受？」
Then Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī went to the Buddha, bowed and stood to one side, and said, "The monk does not accept my gift; who should accept it?"

爾時世尊為大愛道瞿曇彌隨順說法，發歡喜心已頭面禮足而退。
The Buddha then consoled Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī and taught her the Dharma, after which she was filled with joy, bowed, and withdrew.

佛言：「喚彼比丘來。」來已，佛問言：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
The Buddha said, "Call that monk here." When the monk came, the Buddha asked, "Is it true?" The monk replied, "Yes, it is true."

佛言：「從今已後比丘尼與欲應受。」
The Buddha said, "From now on, monks should accept gifts given by nuns."

若上坐應言：「我是僧上座，不應受。」
If a senior monk is asked, he should say, "I am a senior monk and should not accept."

若教誡尼人、若誦波羅提木叉人，應各自說：「不應受。」
Those who instruct nuns or recite the Pātimokkha should also say, "I should not accept."

若守房人、若病人應言：「我不至僧中，更與餘人。」
The one guarding the quarters or those who are sick should say, "I do not come to the assembly, give it to another."

若言：「我是乞食、我是阿練若、我是糞掃衣、我是大德人。」不取欲者，越毘尼罪。
If someone claims, "I am one who lives by alms, practices in the wilderness, wears rag robes, or is a virtuous person," and does not accept the gift, they break a rule.

若言：「我是上座、是教誡尼人、是誦戒人。」者，不取無罪。
However, if they say, "I am a senior monk, an instructor of nuns, or a reciter of precepts," and do not accept, they are blameless.

是名瞿曇彌。
This is regarding Gautamī.



闡陀者，佛住俱睒彌瞿師羅園。
Candra was staying in Gosirsa park at the time of Buddha's presence in Kosambi.

爾時僧集作布薩，時闡陀比丘不肯來，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊：「是犯何等罪？」
At that time, the monks gathered for Uposatha, but the monk Candra refused to come, leading the other monks to report this to the Blessed One, asking, "What offense does this constitute?"

佛言：「得偷蘭罪。」
The Buddha stated, "It is the offense of stealing."

如是比丘布薩不肯來者，得偷蘭罪。
Similarly, any monk who refuses to come for Uposatha commits the offense of stealing.

若為衣鉢事不來不與欲者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not come due to matters of robe or alms bowl without expressing a desire, it is a Vinaya offense.



病者，佛住舍衛城，爾時比丘僧集欲布薩，有一比丘風病動，語比房言：「長老！我風病動，與清淨欲。」
There was a sick person, the Buddha resided in Sravasti. At that time, the monks gathered to perform the Uposatha, and a monk who was troubled by wind illness said to his room companion, "Venerable! I'm afflicted by wind illness, grant me pure desire."

比丘不受。
The monk did not accept.

即往至上座前，脫革屣胡跪合掌，作如是言：「我某甲清淨，僧憶念持。」如是三說已便去。
He then went to the elder, removed his sandals, knelt down, clasped his hands, and said, "I, so-and-so, am pure. The assembly may remember and uphold this." After saying this three times, he left.

諸比丘心生疑惑，以是因緣具白世尊：「得爾不？」
The other monks became doubtful and with this cause, they reported to the Blessed One, saying, "Is this allowable?"

佛言：「善！已如法作竟。但不受欲者，越毘尼罪。」
The Buddha said, "Good! It is done according to the Dharma. However, not accepting the request is a transgression of the Vinaya."

是名病。
This is called illness.




阿練若者，佛住舍衛城阿練若聚落中，比丘常共作布薩。
In the forest retreat, where the Buddha resided in the Shravasti city forest village, monks often gathered to perform the ritual.

時阿練若入聚落作布薩已去。
Then, after the forest retreat, they would enter the village to perform the ritual.

去不久有客比丘來，復於此處布薩，即於中宿。
Shortly after they left, a visiting monk arrived, performed the ritual at the same place, and stayed overnight.

明日共相見，問：「長老！昨何處宿？」
The next day, they met and asked, "Elder! Where did you stay last night?"

答：「此處。」「何處布薩？」答言：「此處。」
He replied, "Here." "Where did you perform the ritual?" He answered, "Here."

聞已心生疑惑，以是因緣具白世尊。
Upon hearing this, they were puzzled, and they reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽一住處再布薩。
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, performing the ritual twice in one place is not allowed.

若阿練、若入聚落中布薩者，不得默然去，應囑沙彌、若園民、若放牧人：
If performing the ritual in the forest retreat or village, one should not leave silently but should notify a novice, a gardener, or a shepherd:

『若後有比丘來者，語令知此中已作布薩。』
'If later a monk comes, tell them that the ritual has already been performed here.'

若無人者，應書柱戶扇作字、若散花作相。
If no one is available, one should write on a pillar or door, or scatter flowers as a sign.

後來者應問應求相。
Those coming later should inquire and seek such a sign.

若去不囑、不作相，後來者不問不求相，俱越毘尼罪。」
If you leave without notifying or creating a sign, and those who come later don't ask or seek a sign, both parties violate the disciplinary rules."

是名阿練若。
This is called a forest retreat.



不應與而與者，佛住舍衛城爾，時諸比丘時集與羯磨欲，非時集與清淨欲。

When one should not give what is given, the Buddha dwelled in the city of Sravasti, where the monks assembled at the right time to give their motions, but assembled at the wrong time to give their pure intentions.

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。

The monks reported this matter to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「從今日後不聽時集與羯磨欲、非時集與清淨欲。

The Buddha said, "From today onwards, it is not allowed to assemble at the right time to give motions or at the wrong time to give pure intentions.

非時集應與羯磨欲、時集應與清淨欲，時集亦得與兩欲：

Assemblies at the wrong time should give motions, while those at the right time should give pure intentions, and assemblies at the right time may give both intentions:

『長老憶念！今僧若十四日、十五日作布薩，我某甲比丘與布薩清淨欲，與我說。』

'Elder, remember! If the Sangha holds the Uposatha on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, I, a certain monk, give the pure intention for the Uposatha, and inform me.'

如是三說。

Thus spoke three times.

與羯磨欲亦三說。

The same applies to giving motions.

若非時集與清淨欲、時集與羯磨欲，越毘尼罪。」

If assemblies at the wrong time give pure intentions or at the right time give motions, it transgresses Vinaya rules."

是名不應與而與。

This is called giving what should not be given.




阿脂羅河者，佛住舍衛城，爾時諸比丘到阿脂羅河邊，敷尼師壇坐誦波羅提木叉。

At the Ajira River, the Buddha resided in Shravasti city, and at that time, the monks went to the riverside, laid out a mat, and recited the Pātimokkha.

時水汎漲漸漸齊膝，如是轉上齊口，極苦乃竟，還至佛所。

When the water gradually flooded up to their knees and eventually up to their mouths, enduring great hardship, they returned to the Buddha.

以是因緣具白世尊：「得立作布薩不？」

They reported this situation to the Blessed One: "Can we perform Uposatha while standing?"

佛言：「得，得行、住、坐、臥作布薩。」

The Buddha said: "You can; perform Uposatha while walking, standing, sitting, or lying down."

行者，若比丘共商人行，至布薩日，有恐怖難，商人行不待，得行作布薩。

For walking, if monks travel with merchants on an Uposatha day and face danger, with merchants unable to wait, Uposatha can be performed while walking.

先應籌量齊幾許得誦戒竟，若山、若石作幖幟，伸手相及羯磨作布薩界。

First, measure how far the recitation can be heard, and use a mountain or rock as a marker. Extend the hand to signify the Sangha boundary for the Uposatha.

羯磨已然後作布薩，是名行布薩。

After the procedure, Uposatha is performed; this is called walking Uposatha.

住者，比丘多，無床座，一切伸手相及作布薩，是名住布薩。

For standing, if there are many monks and no seats, all stand within arm's reach for Uposatha; this is called standing Uposatha.

坐者，有床座作布薩，是名坐布薩。

For sitting, if there are seats, sit for Uposatha; this is called sitting Uposatha.

臥者，比丘老病不能久坐，床角相接得臥作布薩，是名臥布薩。

For lying down, if monks are old or ill and cannot sit long, Uposatha can be performed while lying down on adjacent bed corners; this is called lying Uposatha.

是名阿脂羅河。

This is called the Ajira River.



十一事不名與欲轉欲者，

The eleven things are not called desire-transfer.

「我與長老欲，

'I desire with the elder,

我向取某甲欲并與。」

I desire to take that person's desire and give it.'

是名轉欲。

This is called desire-transfer.




宿與者

In regard to past inclinations 

明日當布薩

Tomorrow one should confess and repent 

今日與欲

Today's desires 

是名宿與欲

Are called past and present inclinations 



界外者，  
The outsider,  

出界與欲，  
Beyond boundaries and desires,  

是名界外。  
Is known as outside the realm.  




丘尼者，與比丘尼欲，是名比丘尼。
A bhikkhuni, with a bhikkhuni's desires, is called a bhikkhuni.




未受具足者，與未受具足人欲，是名未受具足。
One who is not fully ordained, gives desire to a person not fully ordained, is called not fully ordained.




持欲出者

The one who desires to emerge

取欲已出界外

takes what has already emerged outside the boundary

是名持欲出。

this is called desiring to emerge.




與欲出者，

Those who wish to leave,

與欲已出界外，

and those who wish to have already left the boundary,

是名與欲出。

are called those who wish to leave.




受戒後仍有欲望的是取欲已還戒。

Taking the precepts while still having desires is called the "Taking of the Precepts with Remaining Desires."

受戒而品行圓滿的，是取欲已還戒中的受具足。

Taking the precepts and being completely virtuous is the "Acceptance of Completeness" among those with Remaining Desires.

這就是所謂的取欲已還戒。

This is what's referred to as the "Taking of Precepts with Remaining Desires."




與欲已還戒者，

For those who have already returned the precepts of desire,

與他欲已還戒受具足，

and accept the full precepts of desire for others,

是名與欲已還戒。

this is called returning the precepts of desire.



失欲者，比丘病，與欲已，

Those who have lost their desires, the monk is ill, and desire is given,

聞僧中法師說法、持律說毘尼，自力就聽，

He hears the Dharma teacher speak of the law among monks, holds the discipline, and speaks of the Vinaya, listening by his own power, 

坐久疲苦已，先與欲默離座去，

After sitting for a long time and becoming tired and troubled, he silently leaves his seat, having been given desire beforehand,

不名與欲，應更與。

It is not called having desire; it should be further given.

是名失欲。

This is called losing desire.




壞眾者，布薩日比丘僧集，不來諸比丘與清淨欲。
For those who disturb the assembly, on the day of Uposatha, when the monks gather, certain monks do not come and receive pure consent.

若暴風雨、若火、若賊，諸比丘盡驚散，不名持欲到僧中；
In case of a storm, fire, or thieves, if the monks are scattered in fear, it is not called the holding of consent in the assembly of monks;

若一人在，是名到僧。
If there is at least one person present, it is called coming to the assembly.

是名十一不名與欲。
This is called the eleven instances not known as giving consent.




四布薩者，一人受、二人說、三人說、四人廣誦。

The four Uposatha are: one person receives, two people speak, three people speak, four people recite broadly.

一人受者，有一比丘聚落中住，至布薩日應掃塔及僧院，

As for one person receiving, if there is a monk staying in the settlement, on the Uposatha day, he should sweep the stupa and the monastery,

若有者應香汁灑地、然燈散華待客比丘。

If possible, he should sprinkle the ground with fragrant water, light lamps, scatter flowers, and await visiting monks.

若無來者，有罪應作是念：「得清淨比丘者，此罪當如法除。」

If no one comes, feeling guilty he should think, "When I find a pure monk, this sin should be lawfully expiated."

作是念已，胡跪合掌心念口言：「今僧若十四日、十五日布薩，

Having thought thus, he kneels, joins his palms, and mentally recites, "Today, whether it is the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the Uposatha,

我某甲比丘清淨受布薩。」如是三說，是名一人受。

I, monk so-and-so, purify myself to receive the Uposatha." He speaks thus three times. This is called one person receiving.

二人說者，二比丘聚落中住，至布薩日應掃塔及僧院，

For two people speaking, if two monks live in the settlement, on the Uposatha day, they should sweep the stupa and the monastery,

若有者應香汁灑地散華然燈，若有罪者展轉如法悔已，

If possible, they should sprinkle fragrant water, scatter flowers, light lamps, and if there are sins, they should repeatedly repent according to the law.

應胡跪合掌作是說：「長老憶念！今僧若十四日、十五日作布薩，

They should kneel, join their palms and say, "Elder, take heed! Today, whether it is the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the Uposatha,

我某甲比丘清淨。長老憶念持。」是名說。

I, monk so-and-so, am pure. Elder, please remember." This is called speaking.

三人亦如是。

It is the same with three people.

廣誦者，四人應廣誦波羅提木叉，是名廣誦。

For broad recitation, four people should recite the Pratimoksha broadly. This is called broad recitation.




四說者，一從戒序盡四波羅夷，餘者僧常聞誦偈。
The first explanation is, starting from the precepts sequence to the four Parajikas, the rest are verses regularly recited by the monks.

二者盡十三事、二不定法，餘者僧常聞誦偈。
The second is to include the thirteen rules and two undetermined laws, the rest are verses regularly recited by the monks.

三者盡三十尼薩耆，餘者僧常聞誦偈。
The third encompasses the thirty Nissaggiya, the rest are verses regularly recited by the monks.

四者入九十二波夜提，應盡廣誦。
The fourth involves ninety-two Pacittiya, which should be extensively recited.

是名四說。
These are called the four explanations.




布薩有七事應遮：一、不共住人；
There are seven things that should not be allowed in Uposatha: 1. People who do not live together;

二者、別住人；
2. People who live separately;

三、未受具足人；
3. People who have not received full ordination;

四、未說欲；
4. People who have not expressed their desires;

五、未行舍羅；
5. People who have not practiced conduct and discipline;

六、為和合義故；
6. For the sake of reconciliation;

七、和合未竟，是名七應遮。
7. Before reconciliation is completed, these are the seven things that should be avoided.

復次二事應遮布薩：一者若作布薩者僧鬪諍；
Additionally, there are two things that should prevent Uposatha: 1. If during Uposatha there is a quarrel among monastics;

二者僧破。
2. If the monastic community is divided.

是名二事應遮。
These are the two things that should prevent Uposatha.

是名布薩法、與欲法、受欲法。
These are called Uposatha rules, rules of expressing desire, and rules of receiving desire.



安居法者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Regarding the practice of the Rainy Season Retreat, the Buddha dwelt in the city of Sravasti and explained it extensively as above.

爾時諸比丘雨時遊行多所踐害，為世人所嫌：「九十六種出家人尚知安居，如鳥隱巢而自守住。
At that time, many monks would wander during the rainy season, causing much damage, and were criticized by the people: "Even the ninety-six kinds of ascetics know to stay put like a bird nestling in its nest.

沙門釋子自稱善好而不安居。」
The disciples of the Shakya, who claim to be virtuous, do not observe the retreat."

諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。
The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「正應為世人所嫌。從今已後雨時應安居。」
The Buddha said, "You indeed deserve to be criticized by the people. From now on, you should observe the Rainy Season Retreat."

安居法者，至四月十六日，應偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，應作是說：「長老憶念！我某甲比丘，於此僧伽藍雨安居前三月。」
Regarding the practice of the retreat, on the sixteenth day of the fourth month, one should bare the right shoulder, kneel on the right knee, and with joined palms, say: "Reverend sir, please remember, I, such and such a monk, will observe the Rainy Season Retreat here in this monastery for the first three months."

如是三說。
This should be said three times.

若比丘行道未到住處，安居日至，即於路側，若依樹、若車，應受安居。
If a monk is on the road and has not reached his dwelling place when the day of the retreat arrives, he should take up the retreat at the roadside, whether under a tree or in a carriage.

至明相出趣所住處，到後安居日，應偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，作是言：「長老憶念！我某甲比丘，於此僧伽藍雨安居後三月。」
When he sees the light of dawn, he should proceed to his dwelling place, and upon reaching it after the day of starting the retreat, he should bare his right shoulder, kneel on the right knee, and with joined palms say: "Reverend sir, please remember, I, such and such a monk, will observe the Rainy Season Retreat here in this monastery for the remaining three months."

如是三說。
This should be said three times.

比丘行道，前安居日不受安居，一越毘尼罪。
If a monk is traveling and does not begin the retreat properly on the first day, he commits one offense of an ensuing proscription.

到所住處，後安居日不受安居，二越毘尼罪，是人破安居，不得衣施。
Upon reaching his dwelling, if he does not properly begin the retreat on the next day, he commits two offenses of an ensuing proscription; such a person breaks the retreat and is not eligible to receive robe offerings.



衛城，爾時有比丘依聚落雨安居，有檀越營僧事，須水溉灌，求比丘白王通水。
Furthermore, the Buddha resided in Śrāvastī. At that time, there was a monk residing in a settlement during the rainy season retreat. There was a patron engaged in monastic affairs who needed water for irrigation and sought the monk to request the king for water access.

時比丘衣鉢隨身，數詣王門不時得見。
The monk carried his robes and alms bowl with him and frequently visited the king's gate but was not always able to see him.

道路不近，恐失安居。
The road was not close, and he feared missing his retreat.

時世尊見已知而故問：「汝是客比丘耶？」
The Blessed One, having seen and understood, deliberately asked, "Are you a visiting monk?"

「非也。世尊！」
"No, Blessed One!"

「汝是去比丘耶？」
"Are you a departing monk?"

「非也。世尊！」
"No, Blessed One!"

「何故持衣鉢自隨？」
"Why do you carry your robes and alms bowl with you?"

比丘以上因緣具白世尊。
The monk fully explained the circumstances to the Blessed One.

佛言：「從今已後雨安居時，若為塔事、為僧事，應作求聽羯磨。
The Buddha said, "From now on during the rainy season retreat, if it is for the purpose of stupa matters or monastic matters, one should request permission through a formal act of motion.

『大德僧聽！某甲比丘於此處雨安居，若僧時到，僧某甲比丘於此處雨安居，為塔事、僧事出界行，還此處住。
‘Honorable community, listen! Monk [Name] is residing in this place during the rainy season. If an appropriate time for the community arrives, Monk [Name] will leave the boundary for stupa matters or monastic matters and will return to reside in this place.

諸大德聽某甲比丘為塔事、僧事出界行，還此處安居，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。』
Honorable elders, allow Monk [Name] to leave the boundary for stupa or monastic matters and return to this place for the retreat; if the community silently approves, then let it be so.'

若有如是為塔、為僧所求索者，要有所得。
If one makes requests in this way for the stupa or the community, they should preferably obtain something.

若衣、若鉢、若小鉢、若鍵鎡𨥌、若腰帶等及諸一切，要使得一物。
Whether it is clothing, bowls, small containers, locks, belts, or any such items, they should ensure to obtain one thing.

若不得者，越毘尼罪。
If nothing is obtained, it constitutes a Vinaya offense.

如是事訖應還，若半月、若一月、若二月，乃至後自恣應還。
Upon completing such business, one should return, whether after half a month, a month, or two months, and should even return before the subsequent Pavarana ceremony.

若不還者，越毘尼罪。
If one does not return, it constitutes a Vinaya offense.

若道路恐怖、賊難畏失命者，於彼自恣無罪。」
If there is fear of danger on the road, such as bandits, where one's life is at risk, then there is no offense in not returning to the community.

是名安居法。
This is known as the law of the rainy season retreat.



佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

The Teaching of Wanting Self-Indulgence: Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, explaining extensively as above.

爾時諸比丘俱薩羅國遊行，見渠磨帝河邊有叢林，林中有一大空中薩羅樹，其蔭厚密，樹下平正寬博，去聚落不遠不近，作是念：「此中好，可安居。」

At that time, some monks were travelling in the Kosala country and saw a grove by the Yamuna River, with a large sal tree in an open space. Its shade was dense, the ground beneath was flat and wide, and it was neither too far nor too near to the village. They thought, "This place is good; we can reside here."

如是前後人人見者，皆作是念。

Everyone who saw it thought the same.

至安居日，一比丘先至，修治空樹，安置衣鉢敷草而坐。

On the day of residence, one monk arrived first, cleared the space under the tree, laid out his robe and bowl on the grass, and sat.

須臾復有比丘來，問言：「長老！欲此安居耶？」答言：「爾！善好。」

Soon, another monk came and asked, "Elder! Do you want to reside here?" He replied, "Yes! Very good."

如是相續乃至六十人。

In this way, up to sixty people arrived one after another.

最初至者語後諸比丘言：「長老！盡欲此中安居耶？」答言：「爾！善好。此樹中可容衣鉢，其下左右足以安居。」

The first to arrive spoke to the later monks, "Elders! Do you all want to reside here?" They replied, "Yes! Very good. There is enough room under this tree for our robes and bowls, and we can comfortably reside here."

受安居法已，復作是言：「諸長老！我等當作何法得安樂住？」

After accepting the residence practice, they said again, "Elders! What should we do to reside here peacefully and comfortably?"

諸人答言：「所生患惱皆由身口，既得靜處宜共默然，應立不語制。」

The others replied, "All the troubles and annoyances arise from the body and speech. Having found a quiet place, it is appropriate for us all to be silent; a vow of silence should be established."

立不語制竟三月已，還舍衛城往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，佛知而故問：「比丘汝何處安居？」

After maintaining the vow of silence for three months, they returned to Shravasti city to see the Blessed One, prostrated at his feet, and then stood to one side. The Buddha, knowing, asked, "Monks, where have you resided?"

答言：「某處。」

They replied, "At a certain place."

佛問比丘：「少病少惱乞食不苦、行道如法安樂住不？」

The Buddha asked the monks, "Did you have few illnesses, few troubles, easy alms, proper practice, and peaceful dwelling?"

答言：「世尊！少病少惱乞食易得，默然樂住三月不語，已別去。」

They replied, "World-Honored One! We had few illnesses and troubles, alms were easy to obtain, and we happily maintained silence for three months without speaking before parting."

佛言：「此是惡事，如怨家共住，法應共語。」

The Buddha said, "This is a bad matter; it is like living with enemies. According to the Dharma, you should speak with each other.


次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and expounded the teachings as above.

阿那律、金毘盧跋提預在塔山安居竟還舍衛城，至佛所頭面禮足却住一面，
Aniruddha and Kimpila stayed at Mount Stupa for the retreat, and upon returning to Shravasti, they paid respects with heads at the feet of the Buddha and then stood aside.

佛知而故問：「何處安居？」答言：「某處。」
The Buddha, knowing, asked: "Where did you reside for the retreat?" They answered: "At a certain place."

復問：「比丘少病少惱、乞食不苦、行道如法安樂住不？」答言：「世尊！少病少惱乞食易得。」
He further asked: "Were there few illnesses and afflictions, was begging not laborious, and did you practice the path peacefully?" They answered: "World-Honored One! There were few illnesses and afflictions, and alms were easy to come by."

默然樂住三月不語竟，已別去。
They remained silent and practiced peacefully for three months without speaking, and then they departed.

佛言：「此是惡事，如怨家共住。
The Buddha said: "This is a bad practice, like living together with enemies.

從今日後不聽不共語，欲方便少事不語得半月，
From today on, not speaking is not permitted; if one wishes to remain silent for a few matters, it can be done for half a month.

至布薩日應共語、共相問訊、問事、答事、呪願，過布薩日續復如前。
On the day of the Uposatha, one should speak together, inquire about each other, ask and answer questions, and recite blessings. After the Uposatha day, continue as before.

若憍慢若瞋恚不共語者，越毘尼罪。」
If one does not speak due to pride or anger, it is a violation of the Vinaya."



自恣法者，佛告諸比丘：「從今日為諸弟子制自恣法，三月、三語、安居竟，是處安居、是處自恣，從上座和合。」

The confession practice is, the Buddha told the monks: "From today, I establish the practice of confession for my disciples for three months, involving three expressions, at the end of the retreat, in the place of retreat, and in the place of confession, starting with the senior monks in harmony."

三月者，從四月十六日，至七月十五日。

The three months are from April 16th to July 15th.

三語者，見、聞、疑。

The three expressions are seeing, hearing, and doubting.

安居竟者，前安居從四月十六日至七月十五日。

The completion of the retreat refers to the early retreat from April 16th to July 15th.

後安居從五月十六日至八月十五日。

The later retreat is from May 16th to August 15th.

若安居眾中有一人前安居者，至七月十五日，舉眾應同此一人受自恣，自恣訖坐至八月十五日。

If among the retreatants there is one who has completed the early retreat, by July 15th, the assembly should receive confession with him, and after confession, sit until August 15th.

若一切後安居，一切應八月十五日自恣，是名安居竟。

If all are in the later retreat, all should complete the confession by August 15th, which is called the end of the retreat.

是處安居、是處自恣者，若比丘聚落中安居，聞城中自恣日種種供養竟夜說法，眾欲往者應十四日自恣已得去。

In the place where one resides during the retreat, if monks hear about the confession day in the city with various offerings and preaching throughout the night, those who wish to go should confess on the 14th day before leaving.

若此處安居，餘處自恣者，越毘尼罪。

If one stays in one place for the retreat and confesses elsewhere, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

從上座者，不得從小逆作次第，應從上座次第下。

Following the senior monk means not starting from the juniors in reverse order, but from the senior monk in descending order.

不得行行置人如益食法，不得超越，不得總唱言：「一切大德僧見聞疑罪自恣說。」

One should not skip people as in the distribution of surplus food method, nor surpass them, nor make a general announcement saying: "All great virtuous monks openly confess their seeing, hearing, and doubtful transgressions."

是名從上座。

This is called following the senior monk.

應拜五法成就者作自恣人，若一、若二不得過。

One should elect someone accomplished in five practices as the confessor, chosen from one or two, and no more.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲某甲比丘五法成就，若僧時到，僧拜某甲某甲比丘作自恣人。

The karma-preparation person should say: "Listen, great monks! Such and such a monk is accomplished in five practices. When the time for the assembly arrives, the assembly elects such and such a monk as the confessor.

諸大德聽某甲某甲比丘作自恣人，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Great virtuous ones, listen to such and such a monk being made a confessor, and the assembly keeps silent in approval, therefore, let this be held as it is.

受羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！自恣時至，若僧時到，一切僧受自恣。白如是。」

The karma-receiving person should say: "Listen, great monks! The time for confession has arrived, when the assembly is ready, all monks shall partake in the confession. Thus is it stated."

是自恣人應從上座為始。

The confessor should begin with the senior monk.

上座應偏袒右肩胡跪合掌作是說：「長老憶念！今僧十五日受自恣，我比丘某甲，長老及僧自恣說，若見聞疑罪當語我，憐愍故。我若知若見，當如法除。」

The senior monk should uncover his right shoulder, kneel with palms together, and say: "Venerable elder, remember! Today on the 15th day, the assembly confesses. I, such and such a monk, ask the elder and the assembly for confession, if any seeing, hearing, or doubtful transgression, please tell me, out of compassion. If I know or see it, I will correct it according to the law."

如是三說。

This is said three times.

次至第二人。

Then proceed to the second person.

第二人若是下座，應接足言：「大德。」

If the second person is junior, they should bow and say: "Great virtuoso."

為異。

To differentiate.

若二人作自恣人者，一人受上座自恣，一人應下座前立，上座說已下座復說。

If two people are confessors, one receives confession from the senior, and the other should stand before the junior, after the senior speaks and the junior then speaks.

如是展轉次第下到自坐處應受自恣，不得受僧自恣竟然後自恣。

This way, turning in order, one proceeds to one's seat to receive confession, and should not confess after the assembly's confession is complete.

和合者，不得不和合受自恣，不得與欲受自恣。

In harmony, one should not receive confession disharmoniously, and should not harbor desires while confessing.

若病者應將來，若將來有危命憂者，僧應往就。

If there are sick persons, they should be brought; if bringing them raises concerns for their life, the assembly should go to them.

若病人多者應舁床來、若床角相接，若床舁來有危命憂者，不病比丘應連座相接。

If many are sick, they should be brought on beds, connecting the corners; if bringing beds raises life-threatening concerns, the healthy monks should connect seats in succession.

若不周者，不病比丘應出界外作自恣，病比丘即界內自恣。

If it doesn't suffice, healthy monks should confess outside the boundary, while sick monks confess within it.

大眾多者，若一萬、二萬，應一切集在一處，若講堂、若食堂、若浴室受自恣，餘人並嚼齒木並大小行並食，如是竟日通夜未離坐不得遠，乃至明相未出於中自恣。

If the assembly is large, like ten thousand or twenty thousand, they should gather in one place, whether the lecture hall, the dining hall, or the bathroom, for confession, while others chew sticks, walk about, or eat, spending the whole day and night without leaving seats or going far, until the light returns, to complete the confession.

若大眾多六萬、八萬，畏不竟者，應減出界外作自恣。

If an assembly of sixty thousand or eighty thousand fears incomplete confession, some should confess outside the boundary.

若一人受自恣，若二人說、若三人、若四人說自恣。五人廣自恣。

If one person completes the confession, if two people speak, or three or four people confess. Five people should confess broadly.

一人受者，若一比丘聚落中安居，至自恣日應掃塔及僧院，若有者應香汁灑地散花然燈，若有罪者應作是念：「若得清淨比丘來者，此罪當如法除。」

In the case of one person completing, if a monk is dwelling in a settlement on confession day they should sweep the stupa and monastery, perfume the ground, scatter flowers, and light lamps, thinking: "If a pure monk arrives, this transgression will be removed according to the law."

作是念已，胡跪合掌心念口言：「今僧十五日自恣，我某甲比丘清淨受自恣。」如是三說。

Having thought thus, they kneel with palms together, mentally reciting verbally: "Today the assembly confesses on the 15th day. I, such and such a monk, purely receive confession." This is said three times.

二人說者，有罪展轉如法作已，偏袒右肩胡跪合掌言：「長老憶念！今僧十五日自恣。長老自恣說，若見聞疑罪語我，憐愍故。我若知、若見，當如法除。」如是三說。

In the case of two people speaking, having confessed any sins according to the law, uncovering the right shoulder, and kneeling with hands clasped, they say: "Venerable elder, remember! Today the assembly confesses on the 15th day. Elder, confess now, if you have seen, heard, or doubted transgressions, tell me out of compassion. If I know or see, I will correct according to the law." This is repeated three times.

三人四人亦如是，五人應廣自恣。

It is the same for three or four people, and five people should confess broadly.

是名自恣法。

This is called the practice of confession.



摩訶僧祇律卷第二十七  
The 27th Scroll of the Mahasanghika Vinaya




