orry, but you haven't provided the lines you need translated. Could you please provide the text that you want translated into Chinese and English


【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 22 冊 No. 1425 摩訶僧祇律
[Scripture Information] Taisho Revised Edition of the Tripitaka, Volume 22, No. 1425 Mahasanghika Vinaya




#【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

#【Version History】Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【编辑说明】本数据库由 財团法人佛教电子佛典基金会（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏经」所编辑

[Editorial Notes] This database has been compiled by the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō".




蕭鎮國大德提供  
Provided by the Venerable Xiao Zhenguo  

伽耶山基金會提供  
Provided by the Gayasan Foundation  

北美某大德提供  
Provided by a certain Venerable from North America  

釋本禪法師提供新式標點  
New-style punctuation provided by Master Shi Benchan  



#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

#【Other Matters】This database is freely available for circulation. For detailed information, please refer to the "Copyright Declaration of the Foundation for the Electronic Buddhist Canon Database".




inly! Please provide the lines you need translated, and I'll be happy to assist


摩訶僧祇律卷第九東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
Translated by Buddha Bhadra and Faxian during the Eastern Jin dynasty from the Tripitaka of Tianzhu, Mahasanghika Vinaya Volume Nine




受二十七突吉羅罪。

Receives twenty-seven offenses of dukkaṭa.

遇池塘、護城河、河流、溪水，想停留期者，為舉過失。

When encountering ponds, moats, rivers, or streams, intending to stay is to be remarked as an offense.

非想停留期者，無過失。

Without the intention to stay, there is no offense.

若於寺內無水，應求方便得水浴已，而後過，如法迴避。

If there is no water in the monastery, one should seek means to obtain water for bathing, and then cross, evading properly.

若不如法，如果超過，犯突吉羅，應自言不如法。

If not properly, and if crosses, commits a dukkaṭa offense, should confess as improper.

諸比丘，以水濕衣踏，使衣不起堅住，犯突吉羅。

Any monk, wets the garment and steps on it, causing it not to stay firm, commits a dukkaṭa offense.

是為如法，於池中過，無過失。

Thus, properly crossing the pond, there is no offense.

於帆船上過河、過水，無過失。

Crossing a river or water on a sailboat, there is no offense.

彼岸欲引繩過者，唯應如法自持。

For those wishing to pull a rope across from the opposite shore, they should hold properly.

若不能自持而過者，持繩持纜而過，斷壞者，突吉羅。

If unable to hold it and crosses, holding the rope and breaking it is a dukkaṭa offense.



，爾時尊者優陀夷持衣與大愛道比丘尼，作是言：「善哉瞿曇彌！此衣為我浣染打。」

The Buddha was staying at the city of Śrāvastī, at that time Venerable Udayin gave a robe to Bhikkhuni Khandhaka, saying: "Well done, Gautami! Please wash and dye this robe for me."

時大愛道即為浣染打已，送還語優陀夷言：「此衣已浣染打訖，今故送還。」

Then Mahapajapati washed and dyed it, sent it back, and said to Udayin: "This robe has been washed and dyed; now I return it."

優陀夷即呪願：「得樂無病。」送置房裏。

Udayin then blessed: "May you be happy and free from illness." He placed it in the room.

時大愛道持衣與優陀夷已，往詣佛所頭面禮足却住一面。

Then Mahapajapati, after giving the robe to Udayin, went to see the Buddha, bowed her head and worshiped his feet, then stood aside.

佛知而故問：「瞿曇彌！汝手上何以有染色？」

The Buddha, knowing but asking on purpose: "Gautami! Why are your hands stained with dye?"

答言：「世尊！我為優陀夷浣染衣，故手有染色。」

She replied: "World Honored One! I washed and dyed robes for Udayin, hence my hands are stained."

瞿曇彌去不久。佛告諸比丘：「云何優陀夷乃使行道比丘尼浣染衣，妨廢比丘尼業？」

Not long after Gautami left, the Buddha told the monks: "How could Udayin make a practicing nun wash and dye robes, thus hindering a bhikkhuni's duties?" 




衛城，爾時長老阿難陀，是偷蘭難陀比丘尼本二，不善觀察，與不淨衣浣，作是言：「姊！為我浣染打此衣。」

Once, the Buddha was staying in the city of Shravasti, and at that time, the elder Ananda, being related to the bhikkhuni Thullananda, carelessly asked her to wash a dirty robe, saying, "Sister, wash, dye, and press this robe for me."

時偷蘭難陀，即持此衣到精舍，舒看見不淨著衣，即以此衣示諸比丘尼作是言：「汝等看此衣上，是丈夫丈夫相。」

The bhikkhuni Thullananda then took the robe to the convent and, seeing the stain, showed it to the other bhikkhunis, saying, "Look, this is a garment of a monk."

時諸比丘尼語偷蘭難陀言：「如是應覆藏之物，云何示人？若欲浣者應浣，若不浣者應舉。」

The other bhikkhunis said to Thullananda, "Why show such a thing that should be concealed? If you wish to wash it, wash it; if not, then fold it up."

時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，語諸比丘尼言：「此有何可恥使我藏之？此是丈夫丈夫之相。」更復舉示諸比丘尼。

The bhikkhuni Thullananda replied, "What is there to be ashamed of in this marking that needs concealment? This is a monk's garment." She again showed it to the other bhikkhunis.

時六群比丘去比丘尼不遠，聞是語已拍手大笑：「奇事！奇事！」

At that time, a group of six monks, not far from the bhikkhunis, heard this and clapped their hands, laughing loudly, "How extraordinary! How extraordinary!"

時諸比丘聞是語已，即以是事往白世尊。

When the monks heard this, they immediately reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼阿難陀來。」

The Buddha said, "Call Ananda."

即呼來已，佛問阿難陀：「汝實爾不？」

They called him, and the Buddha asked Ananda, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾，不善看故與。」

Ananda replied, "It is true, I gave it without properly considering."

佛告諸比丘：「設使親里比丘有此不淨衣，當與親里比丘尼浣不？」

The Buddha said to the monks, "If a related monk has such a dirty robe, should he give it to a related bhikkhuni to wash?"

答言：「不與。世尊！」

They replied, "No, Blessed One!"

佛言：「設使親里比丘尼，見親里比丘有此可覆藏之事，當出示人不？」

The Buddha said, "If a related bhikkhuni sees such a thing that should be concealed, should she show it to people?"

答言：「不示。世尊！」

They replied, "She should not show it, Blessed One!"

佛告諸比丘：「親里比丘尼，尚不應使浣不淨衣。云何使非親里比丘尼浣故衣？從今已後不聽。」

The Buddha told the monks, "A related bhikkhuni should not be asked to wash a dirty robe, let alone an unrelated bhikkhuni. From now on, this is not allowed."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。若比丘使非親里比丘尼浣故衣、若染、若打，尼薩耆波夜提。」

The Buddha declared to the monks, "Gather all the monks residing in Shravasti. For the benefit of ten reasons, I have established this rule for the monks, to be heard repeatedly. If a monk asks an unrelated bhikkhuni to wash, dye, or press a robe, it is an offense requiring expiation (nissaggiya pacittiya).


比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhus, as mentioned above.




非親里者，非父親相續、非母親相續。
One who is not of the same family lineage is not descended from the father, nor from the mother.




故衣者，乃至經一枕頭，名為故。
Old clothes, even if they last as long as a pillow, are called old.

衣者，如上說。
As for clothes, it is as mentioned above.




浣者，除垢膩。
The washer removes dirt and grease.




染者，根染、皮染、葉染、花染、果染，如是等種種染。
Staining: root dyeing, bark dyeing, leaf dyeing, flower dyeing, fruit dyeing, and such various dyeings.




打者，乃至手打一下。
The batter, even just a tap of the hand.




尼薩耆者，是衣應僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nisagi refers to the robes that should be renounced before the monastic assembly, and the transgression known as Po Ya Di should be repented.

不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If not renounced but repented, it becomes a graver offense than the Vinaya rules.

波夜提者，如上說。
Po Ya Di, as explained above.



自與使受、使與自受、自與自受、使與使受。
Giving personally and receiving by messenger, using a messenger to give and receiving personally, giving and receiving personally, using a messenger for both giving and receiving.

自與使受者，比丘自與，比丘尼遣使受，比丘尼自浣。
Giving personally and receiving by messenger means, the monk personally gives, the nun sends a messenger to receive, and the nun washes it herself.

使與自受者，比丘遣使持衣與，比丘尼自受浣。
Using a messenger to give and receiving personally means, the monk sends a messenger to deliver the robe, and the nun receives and washes it herself.

自與自受者，比丘手自與，比丘尼自受浣。
Giving and receiving personally means, the monk hands over personally, and the nun receives it herself and washes it.

使與使受者，比丘遣使與，比丘尼遣使受、自浣染打，尼薩耆波夜提。
Using a messenger for both giving and receiving means, the monk sends a messenger to give, and the nun sends a messenger to receive, then washes, dyes, and beats it herself, subject to rule of Nissaggiya Pācittiya.

若比丘語浣即浣、語染便染、語打即打，尼薩耆。
If the monk tells her to wash and she washes, tells to dye and she dyes, tells to beat and she beats, it is subject to Nissaggiya.

若比丘使非親里比丘尼浣衣便染、教染便打、教打便浣；教作而不作、不教作便作，越比尼罪。
If the monk instructs a non-related nun to wash a robe and she dyes it, instructs her to beat it and she washes it, instructs to do and she doesn’t do, or doesn’t instruct to do and she does, it's a transgression against the nun's rules.

若比丘語非親里比丘尼，浣衣便染打、教染便浣打、教打便浣染、教作而不作、不教作便作，越比尼罪。
If the monk speaks to a non-related nun, washes the robe and she dyes and beats it, instructs to dye and she washes and beats, instructs to beat and she washes and dyes, instructs to do and she doesn’t do, or doesn’t instruct to do and she does, it's a transgression against the nun's rules.




若比丘與親里衣、非親里浣；
If a monk gives clothes to a relative, but a non-relative washes them;

若與非親里、親里浣；
If given to a non-relative, but a relative washes them;

若與親里、親里浣；
If given to a relative, and a relative washes them;

若與非親里、非親里浣。
If given to a non-relative, and a non-relative washes them.

與親里、非親里浣者，若比丘母姊妹出家，
For giving to a relative and washed by a non-relative, if a monk's mother or sister is ordained,

比丘持衣與令浣，
The monk gives clothes to them to wash,

彼比丘尼持衣還精舍。
That nun takes the clothes back to the monastery.

是尼有弟子尼語言：「阿闍梨有作事，我當作。」
The nun has a student who says, "The teacher has tasks, I will do them."

便取衣浣染打，是比丘無罪，
The student takes the clothes to wash and dye them, and the monk is without fault.

是名與親里、非親里浣。
This is called giving to a relative, but a non-relative washes.

與非親里、親里浣者，若比丘與非親里比丘尼衣令浣染打，
For giving to a non-relative but washed by a relative, if a monk gives clothes to a non-relative nun to wash and dye,

是比丘尼持衣還精舍，
That nun takes the clothes back to the monastery,

是比丘有母姊妹出家，
The monk has a mother or sister ordained,

識是衣便問是比丘尼言：「此是誰衣？」
Recognizing the clothes, asks the nun, "Whose clothes are these?"

答言：「某比丘衣。」
Answers, "They are a certain monk's clothes."

是親里尼便作是念：「某甲不知比尼，無令此比丘得尼薩耆罪。」
The relative nun thinks, "This person does not know the nun, do not let this monk incur an offence."

即取衣浣，是比丘犯越比尼罪，
She takes the clothes to wash, and the monk violates a minor rule.

是名與非親里親里浣。
This is called giving to a non-relative, but a relative washes.

與親里、親里浣者，
For giving to a relative and a relative washes,

若比丘母姊妹出家，是比丘持衣與浣。
If a monk's mother or sister is ordained, the monk gives clothes to them to wash.

彼比丘尼言：「我羸病。」
That nun says, "I am weak and sick."

比丘言：「汝有弟子強健者，應使浣。」
The monk says, "If you have a strong disciple, have them wash."

便教浣，教浣已自持來，
The disciple is instructed to wash, then brings them back themselves.

是比丘得尼薩耆罪。
The monk incurs an offense.

若不教而自使浣者，無罪，
If not instructed but washed by themselves, there is no fault.

是名與親里親里浣。
This is called giving to a relative, and washed by a relative.

若比丘與非親里比丘尼衣，
If a monk gives clothes to a non-relative nun,

非親里比丘尼浣染打者，
And the non-relative nun washes or dyes them,

尼薩耆波夜提，
This incurs a disciplinary offence.

是名與非親里、非親里浣。
This is called giving to a non-relative, and washed by a non-relative.



若比丘持衣及染，具寄比丘尼精舍，去餘閑靖處安居。
If a monk keeps robes and dyes, and entrusts them to a nunnery, he should go to a quiet place to reside.

是比丘尼夏後因自浣染衣過，為比丘浣染衣。
If the nun, after summer, washes and dyes her own clothes, she may wash and dye for the monk.

比丘安居竟，還索衣欲浣染。比丘尼言：「我已浣染竟。」是比丘不犯。
When the monk finishes residing, if he asks for his clothes to be washed and dyed, and the nun says, "I have already washed and dyed them," the monk does not commit an offense.

若比丘寄衣時作是念：「彼當為我浣染打。」後浣染打者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk, when entrusting his robes, thinks, "She will wash, dye, and beat them for me," and later she does, he commits a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若比丘著垢膩衣，詣比丘尼精舍，非親里比丘尼禮比丘足問言：「衣被何以垢膩無人浣染耶？」
If a monk wears dirty or oily clothes and goes to a nunnery, and a nun who is not a relative pays respects and asks, "Why are your clothes dirty and oily with no one to wash them?"

答言：「無人浣。」是比丘尼信心，即便入房取衣與比丘著，留此衣與浣染打，無罪。
He replies, "No one washes them." If the nun, out of faith, then goes into a room, brings clothes for the monk to wear, leaving the clothes to be washed and dyed, there is no offense.

是比丘於餘時作意，故著垢膩衣去作是念：「比丘尼見已自當為我浣。」作是意浣者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If the monk at another time intentionally wears dirty clothes thinking, "The nun will definitely wash for me when she sees," if it's washed with this intention, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若比丘入聚落中，若值狂象車馬灒泥，污比丘衣，即往到比丘尼精舍，令比丘尼湔者，尼薩耆波夜提，以不可截故都捨。
If a monk enters a village, and happens to be soiled by mad elephants, chariots, or horses, he goes to a nunnery and has the nun wash, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense, because it's not permissible to have such things done by others.

若比丘尼灌水，比丘自浣者，無罪。
If the nun pours water and the monk washes by himself, there is no offense.

若比丘於一處浣染衣時，齋日比丘尼遊行，禮諸精舍過，禮諸比丘足，見比丘浣衣。
If a monk washes his robes in one place on observance day, and nuns travel around, paying respects at monasteries, and see the monk washing clothes.

諸比丘尼言：「阿闍梨無人浣衣耶？」答言：「無人。」
The nuns say, "Master, is there no one to wash for you?" He replies, "No one."

是比丘尼信心故語比丘言：「止！我當為浣。」比丘聽隨意浣者，無罪。
If a nun says, "Stop! I will wash for you," and the monk allows her to wash as she wishes, there is no offense.

若是比丘於齋日故浣衣，作是念言：「比丘尼必來當為我浣。」若與浣者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk, on observance day, deliberately washes clothes, thinking, "The nun will surely come and wash for me," and if allowed, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若比丘有多尼弟子，雖不得令浣染打，得令拾薪、取水煮染、取食行水、持扇扇、食竟收鉢，一切事得作。
If a monk has many nun disciples, though not allowed to make them wash or dye, he can make them gather firewood, fetch water for dyeing, serve meals, fan him, and collect bowls after meals, all such tasks are permissible.

若教令浣染打者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If he instructs them to wash or dye, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若為和尚阿闍梨持衣使比丘尼浣，越比尼罪。
If for a teacher or master, he takes robes to a nun to wash, it transgresses against the nuns' rules.

為塔僧使比丘尼浣染打，無罪。
If for a pagoda monk, he has a nun wash, dye, or beat, there is no offense.

是故說：「若比丘使非親里比丘尼浣故衣，若染、若打，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Therefore it is said, "If a monk makes a nun who is not a relative wash his robes, whether dyeing or beating, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense."



，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī and spoke extensively as described above.

月八日、十四日、十五日，城中眾人皆出禮世尊足。
On the 8th, 14th, and 15th days of the month, the people of the city all went out to pay their respects to the Blessed One.

時有一人名阿跋吒，著兩張白㲲，來入祇桓精舍禮世尊足已，次到長老優波難陀住處言：「和南！阿闍梨。」
At that time, there was a man named Avadāta, wearing two pieces of white cloth, who entered the Jetavana monastery, worshiped at the Blessed One's feet, then approached the dwelling of Elder Upananda and said, "Hello, Teacher."

答言：「無病長壽！」
He replied, "May you be free from illness and live long!"

阿跋吒言：「我欲看諸房舍。」
Avadāta said, "I want to look at the various rooms."

時優波難陀答言：「可爾！汝等不欲看尚當示汝，況復欲見。」
Then Upananda replied, "Sure! Even if you didn't want to see, I should show you; moreover, you wish to see."

即將至兩重閣上語言：「看是長老彫文刻鏤、五種彩畫、紺琉璃地、床褥臥具。」
He immediately brought him to the second story and said, "Look, Elder, at the carvings, engravings, five-colored paintings, the lapis lazuli floor, and the bedding."

看已答言：「實好！阿闍梨。」
Having seen it, he responded, "Indeed, it is beautiful! Teacher."

優波難陀言：「長壽！汝是㲲衣亦好長廣細緻。」
Upananda said, "May you live long! Your cloth robe is also good—long, wide, and fine."

時阿跋吒白言：「我欲更看餘房舍。」
At this time, Avadāta said, "I want to see more of the rooms."

時優波難陀，將至第三重閣上看，廣說如上。
Then Upananda brought him to the third story to see, explaining widely as above.

乃至：「汝衣亦好長廣細緻。」
Until saying, "Your robe is also very fine—long, wide, and detailed."

時彼作是念：「是沙門讚歎我衣，必當欲得，是比丘是王及諸大臣所識，有大力勢，若不與者或嫌恨我。」
At that time, he thought, "This Śramaṇa praises my robe; he must want it. This monk is known to the king and the ministers, and has a powerful position. If I do not give it, he might resent me."

阿跋吒言：「阿闍梨欲得此衣耶？」
Avadāta said, "Teacher, do you want this robe?"

答言：「欲得。」
He replied, "I do want it."

阿跋吒言：「阿闍梨隨我歸去，當更與餘衣。」
Avadāta said, "Teacher, come back with me, and I will give you another robe."

優波難陀言：「嗚呼！長壽汝何以言：『更與我餘衣。』我亦更有種種好㲲，但不相似，所以欲得汝此㲲者，欲令相似作一種衣耳。」
Upananda said, "Oh dear! Why do you say, 'Give me another robe'? I also have various good cloths, but they are not similar; I want yours so that I can make a matching garment."

復言：「汝意欲施者，正以此衣與我，其餘好者非我所須。」
He further said, "If you intend to give, give me this robe specifically; I do not need any others."

阿跋吒言：「我著此衣詣國王長者，禮覲世尊，事不可廢。」
Avadāta said, "I am wearing this robe to visit the king and elders, and to pay homage to the Blessed One; it cannot be changed."

優波難陀復言：「汝何以言：『更與我餘衣。』汝實謂我更無好㲲。汝欲施者，正以此衣與我，其餘好者非本所須。」
Upananda replied again, "Why do you say, 'Give me another robe'? You truly think I have no more good cloths. If you want to give, give me this robe; the others are not what I need."

阿跋吒言：「必須此衣者，隨我歸去，到舍當與。」
Avadāta said, "If you must have this robe, come back with me, and I'll give it to you at home."

優波難陀言：「汝不曉方便，不知家中諸難，若父母兄弟姊妹，或當慳惜不聽汝施者，我不得此衣，汝不成施福，二俱失利。以此難故，正應此間施我。」
Upananda said, "You do not know how to be tactful, nor are you aware of the difficulties at home. If your relatives refuse to let you give, I will not get the robe, and you will not gain the merit of giving; both suffer loss. For this difficulty, you should give it to me here."

時阿跋吒苦辭不免，即脫上衣與已便去，著下衣向舍衛城。
Avadāta, unable to avoid the persistent request, took off his upper robe, gave it, and then left, wearing only his lower robe, heading back to Śrāvastī.

時城中人多出禮覲世尊。
At that time, many people in the city went out to pay homage to the Blessed One.

時阿跋吒問眾人言：「汝等今欲那去？」
Avadāta asked the people, "Where are you all going now?"

答言：「欲詣祇桓。」
They replied, "We are going to Jetavana."

語言：「莫去。」
He said, "Don't go."

問言：「何故？」
They asked, "Why?"

答言：「沙門劫人。」
He replied, "The Śramaṇas rob people."

復問：「強奪人物耶？」
They asked again, "Do they forcibly take things?"

答言：「何所復問？汝但看我著兩張㲲去，今正有一張在其中。」
He replied, "What more do you need to ask? Just look, I wore two pieces of cloth there, and now I have only one."

不信佛者即還入城中，聞者生疑，為爾、不爾？
Those who did not believe in the Buddha returned to the city, and those who heard doubted, wondering if it was true or not.

沈吟而住。
They stood hesitantly.

信佛法者即作是念：「終無是事。沙門釋子不與不取，何有劫人？或能方便說法取耳。」
Those who believed in the Buddha and his teachings thought, "This cannot be. Śramana sons of the Śākya do not take without permission, how could they rob? Perhaps they skillfully spoke and persuaded him to give."

以是故少人詣祇桓禮覲世尊。
Because of this, few people went to Jetavana to pay homage to the Blessed One.

世尊知而故問阿難：「今日何故少人來入祇桓。」
The Blessed One, knowing this, deliberately asked Ānanda, "Why are so few people coming to Jetavana today?"

時尊者阿難即以上事具白世尊，
Then Venerable Ānanda reported the entire affair to the Blessed One,

佛言：「呼優波難陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Upananda here."

即便呼來已，佛問優波難陀：「汝實爾不？」
He immediately called him, and the Buddha asked Upananda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！此是惡事。云何比丘強乞人衣？汝常不聞世尊讚歎少欲、呵責多欲無厭耶？」
The Buddha said, "Monk! This is a bad deed. How can a monk forcibly ask for another's robe? Haven't you always heard the Blessed One praise little desire and reproach those with insatiable greed?"

從今日後不聽從非親里居士、居士婦乞衣。
From this day forth, monks are not permitted to solicit robes from laymen or laywomen who are not relatives."


復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining extensively as above.

爾時北方有六十比丘，來詣舍衛城禮覲世尊。
At that time, sixty monks from the north came to Śrāvastī to pay respects to the World-Honored One.

中道被賊失衣，裸形入祇桓精舍，禮諸比丘。
On the way, they were robbed of their clothes by thieves, entered Jetavana Monastery naked, and paid respects to the monks.

諸比丘問言：「汝是何人？」
The monks asked, "Who are you?"

答言：「出家人。」
They replied, "We are renunciants."

又問：「何道出家？」
They further asked, "Which path did you renounce?"

答言：「釋種出家。」
They answered, "We renounced the Shakya clan."

又問：「汝衣何在而裸形耶？」
They asked again, "Where are your clothes, and why are you naked?"

答言：「我道中遇賊失衣。」
They replied, "We encountered thieves on the way who took our clothes."

爾時諸比丘各各與衣，有與僧伽梨者、欝多羅僧者、安陀會者、尼師檀者。
At that time, each monk gave them clothes, including a Sanghati, Uttarasanga, Antaravasaka, and Nivasana.

是比丘著衣已，往到佛所頭面禮足却住一面。
The monks, having dressed, went to the Buddha, paid respect, and stood to one side.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「汝等何處來？」
The Buddha, knowing the situation, asked the monks, "Where do you come from?"

答言：「世尊！我等從北方來。」
They replied, "World-Honored One, we come from the north."

佛問諸比丘：「汝忍苦乞食不難、道路不疲極耶？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Did you endure hardships and begging for food without difficulty, and were you not exhausted by the road?"

答言：「世尊！我等忍苦，乞食不難、道路不疲，但道中遇賊失衣，裸形入祇桓。」
They replied, "World-Honored One, we endured hardships; begging for food was not difficult, nor was the road exhausting, but we met thieves on the way who took our clothes, and we entered Jetavana naked."

佛問比丘：「汝等道中為無聚落城邑耶？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Were there no villages or towns along your way?"

答言：「有。」
They replied, "There were."

佛言：「何以不乞？」
The Buddha asked, "Why did you not beg for clothes?"

諸比丘白佛言：「我聞世尊制戒，不得從非親里乞衣，復無親里，亦無檀越施者，以是故我等不敢乞衣，裸形而來。」
The monks told the Buddha, "We heard that the World-Honored One has instituted a rule against begging for clothes from strangers, and there are neither relatives nor donors, so we did not dare to beg for clothes and came naked."

佛讚持戒言：「善哉！善哉！諸比丘！汝等正隨順直信出家，乃至失命因緣不應故犯戒。」
The Buddha praised their adherence to the precepts, saying, "Well done, well done, monks! You have renounced the world with genuine faith, and even in life-threatening situations, you should not break the precepts."

從今日後聽失衣時得乞。
From today onward, when you lose your clothes, you are allowed to beg for them.

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all the monks residing in Śrāvastī, and for the sake of ten benefits, I will institute a precept for all monks, so that those who have heard may hear again."

若比丘從非親里居士、居士婦乞衣，尼薩耆波夜提，除餘時。
If a monk begs for clothes from a layperson or laywoman who is not a relative, it is a nisagghi pacittiya offense, except in other times.

餘時者，失衣時是名餘時。
'Other times' refers to times when clothes are lost.



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is one as described above.




非亲里者，非父亲相续、非母亲相续。
Those who are not close relatives, are neither succeeding the father nor the mother.

无亲因缘，一亲里、多非亲里。
Without familial connections, one is a close relative, but many are not.

多亲里、一非亲里，离此二众得罪。
Many are close relatives, but one is not; departing from these two groups incurs guilt.




居士者，家主也。
A lay practitioner is the master of the home.




衣者，欽婆羅衣、劫貝衣、芻摩衣、憍舍耶衣、舍那衣、麻衣、軀牟提衣。
Cloth includes Kambala cloth, Kambaya cloth, Chuma cloth, Kausheya cloth, Sana cloth, Hemp cloth, Kumutti cloth.




乞者，若自乞、若使人乞，除餘時乞衣無罪。
Beggar, if one begs for oneself, or sends someone to beg, it is not a sin to beg for clothes outside the prescribed times.

餘時者，失衣時。
The extra time refers to when one has lost clothes.

失衣有十因緣：
There are ten causes for losing clothes:

若王奪、若賊奪、若火燒、若風飄、若水漂、
If taken by a king, if stolen by a thief, if burned by fire, if blown away by the wind, if washed away by water,

若女人起欲心奪、
if taken by a woman with a desirous heart,

若父母親里欲令罷道故奪、
if taken by parents or relatives wanting to make one stop the path,

若自藏後忘不知處、
if one hides it oneself and forgets the place,

若藏衣腐爛、
if stored clothes rot,

若歲久朽壞不可承案，
if they decay due to age and cannot be used,

是名十除餘時，
these are called the ten extra times,

世尊說無罪。
The World-Honored One says there is no sin.



尼薩耆波夜提者，是衣應僧中捨，
If it is a case of relinquishment, this robe should be given away among the assembly.

波夜提罪應懺悔，
The offense of transgression should be confessed and repented.

不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
Not giving it away while repenting transgresses the monastic rules.

波夜提者，如上說。
As for the transgression, it is as mentioned above.



旬內有衣者，若失僧伽梨，欝多羅僧在，不應乞。  
If a monk within three yojanas has clothing, if the monk's outer robe is lost, but the upper garment is present, he should not beg.

若失僧伽梨，欝多羅僧、安陀會在，不應乞。  
If the monk's outer robe is lost, but both the upper garment and the undergarment are present, he should not beg.

若失三衣，若覆瘡衣在，不應乞。  
If the monk loses all three robes, but the wound-covering robe is present, he should not beg.

若失三衣、覆瘡衣，若雨浴衣在，不應乞。  
If the monk loses all three robes and the wound-covering robe, but the rain-bathing robe is present, he should not beg.

若比丘失三衣、覆瘡衣、雨浴衣，若覆臥褥具在，不應乞。  
If a monk loses all three robes, the wound-covering robe, and the rain-bathing robe, but the blanket is present, he should not beg.

若比丘失三衣、覆瘡衣、雨浴衣、覆臥褥具，若任衣在長兩肘廣一肘，不應乞。  
If a monk loses all three robes, the wound-covering robe, the rain-bathing robe, and the blanket, but any cloth of two cubits long and one cubit wide is present, he should not beg.

何以故？是比丘應著是下衣往三由延受先衣，若是道中有諸難事不得往趣衣者，得乞雨衣無罪。  
Why is this so? The monk should wear the lower garment and go within three yojanas to receive the original garment. If there are difficulties on the road and he cannot go to get the robe, he may beg for a rain robe without fault.




若比丘從非親里乞衣、若自乞、若使人乞、若作相乞、若說法乞。
If a monk begs for robes from non-relatives, whether by begging himself, sending someone to beg, creating a situation to beg, or using teachings to ask.

自乞者，自身往乞。
Begging himself means going to beg personally.

使乞者，遣人往乞。
Sending someone to beg means dispatching another person to do it.

作相乞者，作寒相、熱相。
Creating a situation to beg means appearing cold or hot.

云何寒相？
What does appearing cold mean?

若比丘冬中八夜雨雪時，著弊故衣詣檀越家現凍戰相。
If during eight snowy nights in winter, a monk wears shabby clothes to a layperson's home and appears shivering.

爾時檀越禮比丘足問言：「阿闍梨無有時衣耶？何以寒凍乃爾？」
Then the layperson bows to the monk and asks, "Do you not have warm clothes, teacher? Why are you so cold?"

答言：「無有。汝父母在時恒為我作時衣，今汝父母去世，誰當為我作者？非但汝父母死，亦是我父母無常。」
He replies, "No, I don't. When your parents were alive, they always made clothes for me, but now who will do it? Not only have your parents passed, but mine were also impermanent."

檀越即言：「阿闍梨莫怨恨！我當為作時衣。」
The layperson says, "Teacher, do not worry! I will make clothes for you."

是名寒相乞。若得衣者，尼薩耆波夜提。
This is called begging by appearing cold. If he gets clothes, it's a transgression.

云何熱相？
What does appearing hot mean?

若比丘五六月大熱時，著厚納衣流汗詣檀越家現熱相。
If during the intense heat of May and June, a monk wears thick clothes and sweats at a layperson's home appearing hot.

爾時檀越禮比丘足問言：「阿闍梨無時衣耶？何以熱之流汗乃爾？」
Then the layperson bows to the monk and asks, "Do you not have the right clothes, teacher? Why are you sweating so much?"

答言：「無有。汝父母在時恒為我作時衣，今汝父母去世，誰當為我作者？非但汝父母死，亦是我父母無常。」
He replies, "No, I don't. When your parents were alive, they always made clothes for me, but now who will do it? Not only have your parents passed, but mine were also impermanent."

檀越即言：「阿闍梨莫怨恨！我當為作時衣。」
The layperson says, "Teacher, do not worry! I will make clothes for you."

是名熱相乞。若得衣者，尼薩耆波夜提。
This is called begging by appearing hot. If he gets clothes, it's a transgression.

云何說法乞？
What is using teachings to ask?

是比丘為衣故，與檀越說偈言：
For the sake of robes, the monk recites a verse to the layperson:



若人以衣施，
If a person offers clothing,

得生最勝處；
They will be reborn in the most superior place;




以樂布施者，  
Those who happily give,

人天受福報。  
will be rewarded with blessings by humans and heaven.




生天得妙色，  
Entering heaven, one attains a wondrous complexion,  

天寶冠莊嚴；  
Adorned with a celestial jeweled crown;  




衣施比丘故，  

Giving clothes to the monks,  

生生自然衣。」  

In each life, naturally having clothes."  




。
This is called "requesting for teachings."

若得衣者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If one receives clothing, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若乞漉水囊、若乞小補衣物、若繫頭物、若裹瘡物、若衣緣、若乞衣中一條，如是等物不犯。
If one requests a water filter bag, small patches of cloth, head coverings, wound coverings, garment edges, or a strip of cloth from a robe, these are not offenses.

若乞是物，時檀越施全物及衣裁，取者不犯。
If one requests these items and the donor offers the whole item or fabric, the recipient does not commit an offense.

若比丘作是念：「我但索小小物，檀越自當與我全衣。」得者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk thinks, "I will only request a small item, and the donor will naturally give me a whole robe," and receives it, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若為和尚阿闍梨乞，越比尼罪。
If one requests for an abbot or preceptor, it is a pācittiya offense.

若為塔僧乞，不犯，是故說：
If one requests for monks of a stupa, it is not an offense, thus it is said:

「若比丘從非親里居士、居士婦乞衣，尼薩耆波夜提。
"If a monk requests clothing from laymen or laywomen who are not relatives, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

除餘時，餘時者失衣時。」
Except for other times, which refers to when one's robe is lost."



，六十比丘從北方來向舍衛城，路中被賊失衣，入祇桓精舍。
Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī, and sixty monks came from the north towards Śrāvastī, losing their clothes to thieves on the way, they entered the Jeta Grove monastery.

時優波難陀見已，語是失衣比丘言：「諸長老！世尊聽比丘失衣時，得從非親里乞，何以不乞？」
At that time, Upananda saw them and said to these monks who lost their clothes, "Elders! The World-Honored One allows monks who have lost their clothes to seek alms from non-relatives, why don't you do so?"

答言：「諸梵行人已與我衣足，是故不乞。」
They replied, "Some virtuous people have already given us clothes, so we do not seek alms."

時優波難陀言：「若今不乞者徒失此利。」
Upananda said, "If you do not seek alms now, you will miss this opportunity."

答言：「我已得衣，失利、不失利復何在耶？」
They replied, "We have already received clothes, so what concern is there about gaining or losing?"

優波難陀語失衣比丘言：「汝若不能乞者，我當為汝乞。」
Upananda said to the monks who lost their clothes, "If you cannot seek alms, I will do it for you."

彼言：「汝自知時。」
They said, "You may do so as you see fit."

優波難陀晨朝著入聚落衣，持紙筆入舍衛城，語諸優婆塞言：「汝等助我乞衣。」
In the morning, Upananda put on his village-entry clothes, took a sheet and pen, and entered Śrāvastī to say to the lay practitioners, "Please help me ask for clothes."

優婆塞問言：「何以故乞？」
The lay practitioners asked, "Why do you seek alms?"

答言：「有比丘從北方來，道中遇賊都失衣物，為彼故乞衣。」
He replied, "Some monks came from the north and were robbed on the way, losing all their belongings, so I am seeking clothes for them."

優婆塞言：「可爾。」
The lay practitioners said, "Very well."

即將至市種種店肆上為勸化。
They then went to the market to various shops to solicit assistance.

時人多有信敬者，或得一張、或得兩張，如是漸漸多得衣物，重擔而行。
At that time, there were many believers who respected them, and they received one or two pieces of cloth, gradually accumulating many items and carrying a heavy load.

於諸信心家四分，始從一分家乞，方欲更乞。
At the houses of the faithful, he divided the donations into four parts, started seeking from one house, and then intended to seek more.

優婆塞言：「阿闍梨！可足還去。」
The lay practitioners said, "Teacher! It is sufficient, please return."

優波難陀言：「嗚呼！長壽何乃淺促？我乞始有次第，不應還去。」
Upananda said, "Alas! Why is life so short? I have just begun to seek step by step and should not go back."

何以故？多人布施多人得福，我等出家人食有時限，猶未欲去。
Why? Because many donating means many get blessed, and we, as monks, have time limits to receive food, and I am not ready to leave.

汝等在家人，遇食便食不畏失時，有何急事怱怱欲去？
You, householders, eat whenever you encounter food without fear of losing time; what urgent matter makes you hastily want to leave?"

如是復更行乞，優婆塞復言：「可足。阿闍梨！」
In this way, he continued to beg, and the lay practitioners again said, "It is sufficient, Teacher!"

優波難陀復言：「猶故未足。」
Upananda again said, "It is still not enough."

優婆塞言：「有幾人耶？」
The lay practitioners asked, "How many people are there?"

答言：「多人。」
He replied, "Many people."

復問：「為有幾人？」
They asked again, "How many people exactly?"

長引聲言：「乃有六十比丘。」
He stretched his voice and said, "There are as many as sixty monks."

優婆塞言：「阿闍梨！此諸衣可供五百比丘，何況六十？何以為乞？欲坐㲲肆耶？」
The lay practitioners said, "Teacher! These clothes are enough for five hundred monks, let alone sixty. Why are you seeking more? Do you intend to run a cloth business?"

即擲紙筆放地，而瞋恚言：「何處生是多求無厭不知止足人？」
They then threw the sheet and pen to the ground, angrily saying, "Where did such a greedy person who doesn't know contentment come from?"

是中有少欲知足比丘，聞是語已，往白世尊。
Among them was a monk with few desires and contentment, who, upon hearing these words, went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「呼優波難陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Upananda to come."

即便呼來。佛廣問上事：「汝實爾不？」
He was immediately called to come. The Buddha asked broadly about the matter, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, "It's true, World-Honored One!"

佛問優波難陀：「何以故乞？」
The Buddha asked Upananda, "Why did you seek alms?"

答言：「我為失衣比丘故乞。」
He replied, "I sought alms for the monks who lost their clothes."

佛即呼失衣比丘來，來已。佛語：「汝等比丘，實使優波難陀乞衣耶？」
The Buddha then called the monks who lost their clothes to come, and asked, "Did you indeed have Upananda seek alms?"

答言：「不也。世尊！」
They replied, "No, World-Honored One!"

佛復問失衣比丘：「優波難陀，何因緣故作如是言？」
The Buddha again asked the monks who lost their clothes, "Why did Upananda make such a claim?"

失衣比丘即以上事具白世尊。
The monks who lost their clothes reported the matter in full to the World-Honored One.

佛告優波難陀：「此是惡事。癡人！不應乞者便乞，應乞者不乞。」
The Buddha told Upananda, "This is a bad deed. Foolish one! You seek when you shouldn't, and don't seek when you should."

佛語優波難陀：「汝常不聞我無數方便讚歎少欲、毀呰多欲？」
The Buddha said to Upananda, "Have you not heard me, with countless methods, praise those with few desires and criticize those with many desires?"

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。
This is neither the Dharma, nor the discipline, nor the Buddha's teaching; it cannot be used to cultivate good practices.

佛種種呵已告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha, after repeated rebuking, told the monks, "All the monks residing in Śrāvastī should gather. For the sake of ten benefits, I establish this rule for the monks, even those who have heard must hear it again.

若比丘失衣時，得從非親里居士、居士婦乞衣。
If a monk loses his clothes, he can seek alms from laymen or laywomen who are not relatives.

若非親里居士、居士婦，自恣多與衣，是比丘得受上下衣，過是受者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If non-relative laymen or laywomen willingly give many clothes, the monk may receive the upper and lower garments. Anything beyond that is to be confessed and atoned for according to the Prātimokṣa rule.


比丘者，如上說。
As for the Bhikkhus, as stated above.




失衣有十事，如上說。
There are ten things about losing clothes, as mentioned above.




衣服包括，各种类型的布衣，毛衣，草衣，皮衣，丝衣，麻衣，和棉衣。

Garments include various types of cloth clothing, wool clothing, grass clothing, leather clothing, silk clothing, linen clothing, and cotton clothing.




非亲里者，非父母亲相续，是名非亲里。

Those who are not relatives are not successors from parents, they are called non-relatives.




居士者，家主也。  
A lay practitioner is the master of the house.




乞者，若自乞、若使人乞、若勸化，檀越欲自恣施，得取上下衣，自恣者隨意與。
As for a beggar, whether asking personally, sending someone to ask, or persuading, if a donor wishes to give freely, they may take upper and lower garments, leaving it to the donor's discretion.

上下衣者，廣三肘、長五肘，得取二衣。
The upper and lower garments are three cubits wide and five cubits long, and two garments may be taken.

若過是取者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If more than this is taken, it is an offense entailing expiation.



尼萨耆者，是衣应僧中舍，波夜提罪应悔过。
Nisajiya, if a robe should be relinquished to the Sangha, a pārājika offense should be confessed.

若不舍而悔，越比尼罪。
If not relinquished and confessed, it becomes an offense excess of prātimokṣa.

波夜提者，如上说。
As for a pārājika offense, it is stated above.



若比丘三由延內有衣者，
If a monk has robes within a yojana,

若失僧伽梨，欝多羅僧在，不應乞，
If he loses his outer robe but has an inner robe, he should not beg,

乃至任衣在不應乞。
He should not beg as long as a robe remains.

何以故？
Why is that?

是比丘應著是下衣，
This monk should wear the lower robe,

往三由延受先衣，
Go within a yojana to receive a previous robe,

若道中有諸難事不得往取衣者，
If there are obstacles on the way preventing the retrieval of the robe,

得乞兩衣無罪。
It is not a fault to beg two robes.



寒相

Cold aspect

熱相

Hot aspect

說法相

Teaching aspect

如上說。

As stated above.




若比丘共估客著道行，若賊從一方、二方、三方來隨，便遠賊走。
If a monk travels with traders and robbers follow from one, two, or three directions, he should run away from them.

若四方俱來，不應走，當正身住，不得格賊。
If they come from all four directions, he should not run but stand firm without confronting the robbers.

若賊言：「取僧伽梨來。」答言：「與長壽！」
If the robbers say, "Hand over your robe," he should answer, "I wish you long life!"

如是一一衣物隨索多少與之，不得高聲大喚瞋罵賊。
He should give the robbers whatever clothing they request, without shouting or angrily scolding them.

與物已，當徐徐去，入林草中藏，遙望看，若賊去後餘有不？
After giving his possessions, he should leave slowly, hide in the thickets, and observe from afar if the robbers have left anything behind.

受持衣在者應受持。
If there are remaining robes, he should take them.

若無餘衣者，是中有比丘、若外道出家，為賊所殺者，應取是衣受持。
If there are no leftover clothes, and a monk or an ascetic from another sect was killed by the robbers, he should take their clothes.

若無出家人死，有俗人死者，應取俗人衣截縷作淨然後受持。
If no monk was killed but a layperson was, he should take the layperson's clothes, cut and clean them before wearing.

若無死人衣，估客有遺棄好衣物者不應取，若棄弊衣物者應取受持。
If there are no dead people's clothes and traders have discarded good clothes, he should not take them, but he can take worn-out clothes.

若估客還來喚比丘，與是好衣者應取，取已截縷牛屎染作淨受持。
If traders come back and offer good clothes, he should take them, cutting them into pieces and dyeing them with cow dung for purity.

若是估客語比丘言：「我借汝此衣著，到前住處還我，莫令損減。」
If a trader says to a monk, "Lend me your robe to wear until we reach the next place, and I will return it without damage,"

是比丘應取是衣，攝縷在內篸縫令縷不現，作淨受持，到住處應還。
The monk should lend the robe, making sure the stitches are invisible, purify it, and return it when they reach the destination.

若無是事，應篸樹葉遮前後而去。
If this situation does not occur, he should cover himself with leaves and keep moving.

若無是事，不得如尼揵子掉臂當道行，當以手遮前障形體。
In such a case, he shouldn't walk unconcerned like a Nirgrantha follower, but cover his body modestly with his hands.

在道側行，莫入深榛中行，令賊謂是伺捕者。
He should walk along the roadside and avoid dense bushes so the robbers won't think he is spying on them.

應在道邊淺草中行，行時若逢人來，當即於淺草中小現處坐，令行人見之。
He should walk in the shallow grass by the side of the road and sit in a visible spot if someone approaches.

若人問言：「汝是何人？」答言：「出家人。」
If someone asks, "Who are you?" he should reply, "I am a monk."

「何道出家？」答言：「釋種出家。」
"Which path have you taken to become a monk?" He should respond, "The Shakya lineage."

「何以裸形？」答言：「被賊。」
"Why are you naked?" He should answer, "I was robbed."

若不乞而自多與衣者，取無罪。
If someone offers clothes without being asked, he can take them without fault.

若不自與者應從乞，乞時多與衣者，應取二領，廣三肘、長五肘衣。
If not freely given, he should ask for them and can take two pieces of clothing, each three cubits wide and five cubits long, if offered abundantly.

若無是事，當詣阿練若住處，彼知識邊得衣者應受。
If this doesn't happen, he should go to a forest dwelling and obtain clothes from knowledgeable people there.

若無阿練若住處，應至塚間。
If there is no such dwelling, he should go to a cemetery.

若有守墓人，應語言：「我欲拾弊衣。」
If there's a caretaker, he should say, "I wish to pick up worn-out clothes."

若守墓人教取，取已示我，當取示之。
If the caretaker allows him, he should take them and show what he has taken.

若取死女人衣時，女身未壞者，應往頭邊而取。
When taking clothes from a dead woman, if her body is intact, he should take them from the head side.

若身已壞，得隨意取；若死男子衣亦隨意取。
If the body is decayed, he can take from anywhere; the same applies to dead men's clothes.

若死人衣有寶者，應足躡却寶，持衣而去。
If there's treasure in the clothes, he should step on the treasure and leave with the clothes.

若不覺有寶，持衣還乃知有寶者，應付淨人持作湯藥。
If he unknowingly takes treasure, once aware, he should give it to a virtuous person to make medicine.

若守墓者語比丘言：「聽汝取不好衣，好者勿取。」
If the caretaker tells the monk, "You may take the bad clothes but not the good ones,"

是比丘到塚間，不見弊者、多有好衣，即持還語守墓人言：「正有是好衣耳。」
Upon not finding worn-out clothes and seeing mostly good ones, he should return and tell the caretaker, "There are only good clothes."

守墓人聽取便取，若言：「是好，不聽汝取。」比丘應還，更求餘者。
If allowed, he takes them; if told, "These are good, you can't take them," the monk should return and seek elsewhere.

若彼語比丘：「取在地者。」即取在地者。
If told to take those on the ground, he should only take those.

若言：「取空中者。」即取空中者。
If told to take those hanging, he should only take those.

若是好衣半在地，半在空中，應截半取。
If a good piece is half on the ground and half hanging, he should cut and take the portion on the ground.

若無是事者，當到聚落中，問比丘住處。
If nothing applies, he should go to a village and inquire about the monk's residence.

不應晝日入聚落，應待闇放牧人還時俱入聚落。
He should not enter in broad daylight but wait until herdsmen return at dusk.

不應依牸牛邊，當在羸小牛中行。
He should not walk beside cows but among the weak young calves.

若見人時加趺而坐，若人問言：「汝是何人？」答言：「出家人。」
If he encounters people, he should squat down, and if asked, "Who are you?" he should reply, "I am a monk."

「何道出家？」答言：「釋種出家。」
"Which path have you taken to become a monk?" "The Shakya lineage."

「汝衣何處？」答言：「被賊失盡。」
"Where are your clothes?" "They were all taken by robbers."

若不求自與者，得隨意多取。
If offered without asking, he can take as much as he needs.

若不與者，應從乞。乞時多與者，應取二領，衣廣三肘、長五肘。
If not given, he should ask for them, and can take two pieces each three cubits wide and five cubits long if offered abundantly.

若復無是事者，應到精舍中問舊比丘：「此中誰是維那？誰是知床褥人？」
If still unsuccessful, he should go to a monastery and ask the senior monks, "Who is the steward here? Who is in charge of linens?"

答言：「某甲是。」
They should reply, "So-and-so is."

爾時是比丘應到是知事比丘所問言：「爾所歲比丘應得何等床褥臥具？」
The monk should then ask, "What kind of sleeping materials should a monk receive?"

答言：「爾所歲比丘應得如是床褥臥具。」
They should reply, "A monk should receive such bed linens."

是比丘得是褥，取摘開以毛舉著一處，取表裏作泥洹僧。
If he receives a mattress, he should take it apart, remove the stuffing, and make a robe.

若得枕亦摘開，以毛舉著一處取表裏，作僧祇枝。
If he gets a pillow, he should also take it apart, remove the stuffing, and make patches for monk robes.

得臥具取著已，應禮塔、禮上座。
After making his bedding, he should pay respects to the stupa and senior monks.

問訊下座，應語言：「我道中被賊失衣，當助我乞衣。」
Saluting the junior monks, he should say, "I lost my clothes to robbers on the road; please help me gather clothes."

若舊比丘言：「汝如餓烏脚不能住，誰當助汝。正是沽酒家搏掩家劫汝；或用易食，而言被劫，索人助乞。」
If the senior monks say, "You can't stay like a hungry crow; who will help you? Maybe it's a trick to get food!"

若爾，應往至優婆塞所言：「長壽！我道中被賊失衣，汝等當助我乞衣。」
If so, he should go to a lay devotee and say, "Householder, I lost my clothes to robbers; please help me get new ones."

答言：「可爾。阿闍梨！即時為乞。」
And if they say, "Certainly, venerable; I'll arrange it right away."

得多衣者，比丘應取兩衣廣三肘、長五肘。
If given plenty of clothes, the monk should take two pieces each three cubits wide and five cubits long.

爾時優婆塞語比丘言：「可得方便，為我盡取是衣不？」
Then the lay devotee might say, "Can you manage to take more of these clothes?"

答言：「汝可轉易兩張細㲲者持來。」
He should reply, "Bring two pieces of finer cloth for me."

若優婆塞巧作方便，將比丘出界外語言：「阿闍梨！此衣布施現前僧，現前無僧，阿闍梨現前應受。」
If the lay devotee expertly persuades, leading the monk outside and saying, "This cloth is for the present monks; there's no one here, so you may have it,"

爾時比丘受，無罪。
Then the monk may accept it without fault.

若優婆塞與大張㲲，當裁取兩衣段。
If given a large piece of cloth, he should cut it to the appropriate size.

問言：「何故？」答言：「世尊制戒，正得取兩衣。」
When asked why, he should say, "The Buddha established this rule; monks may have two robes."

優婆塞言：「阿闍梨但且取染。」
The lay devotee might say, "Take and dye it, venerable."

比丘取染已送還，優婆塞言：「未染時是俗人衣，我尚不欲，況今染壞色，是出家人衣，我不復取。」
When the monk returns it dyed, the lay devotee might say, "I didn't want it even when it was undyed and lay clothing; now it's a monk's garment and I'm even less inclined."

比丘爾時得取，作衣隨意用。
At that time, the monk may keep it and make clothes as needed.

是比丘先所摘褥枕表裏，作泥洹僧祇枝者，浣已還復本褥枕臥具付知事人，然後便去。
The monk should wash and restore the original bedding he tore apart and return it to the person in charge before leaving.

若欲即住此處者，隨意更請不得即留。
If he wishes to stay at that place, he should ask for permission, as he cannot remain without it.

是故說：「若比丘失衣時，得從非親里居士、居士婦乞衣。
Thus it is said: "When a monk loses his clothes, he can seek clothing from unrelated laypeople or their wives.

非親里居士、居士婦自恣多與衣，是比丘得取上下衣。
If unrelated laypeople abundantly offer clothes by themselves, the monk may take both upper and lower garments.

過是受者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
To accept beyond this is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense."



佛住舍衛城，爾時有乞食比丘，時到著入聚落衣持鉢入城。
In the city of Śrāvastī where the Buddha resided, there was a mendicant monk who, when the time came, put on his robes and carried his bowl into the city.

次行乞食到一家。
He went from house to house begging for food and arrived at one.

其家婦人語比丘言：「我某日當飯僧施衣。」
The woman of the house said to the monk, "On a certain day, I will offer a meal and robes to the monk."

比丘言：「善哉姊妹！作三堅法身命財，中間莫有留難。」
The monk replied, "Good sister! Uphold the three strong principles of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha without obstacles in between."

言已便去。比丘乞食還已至溫室中，語諸比丘言：「我語長老好事。」
Having said this, he left. When the monk returned after begging for food, he told the other monks, "I have a good story to tell the elder."

答言：「有何好事？」
They replied, "What good story?"

「我聞某甲優婆夷，某日欲請僧食布施衣。」
"I heard that a certain female lay disciple plans on a certain day to offer food to the monks and donate robes."

時難陀、優波難陀聞已即問言：「長老！其家門巷在何處？姓字何等？」
Then, Nanda and Upananda, upon hearing this, asked, "Elder monk! Where is this house located? What is the name?"

問知已明日清旦，著入聚落衣到其家言：「無病！優婆夷。」
Upon hearing this, the next morning they put on their robes and went to the woman's house, saying, "Greetings, laywoman!"

優婆夷言：「和南！阿闍梨。」
The laywoman replied, "Hail, teacher!"

比丘言：「我聞好消息。」
The monk said, "I heard good news."

問言：「聞何等事？」
She asked, "What news did you hear?"

答言：「聞汝欲請僧設供施衣。」
He replied, "I heard you wish to invite monks to offer food and donate robes."

答言：「有是心，但恐中間諸難不成。」
She said, "I have such an intention, but I fear obstacles in between might prevent it."

比丘言：「汝請僧設供施衣，欲與長老比丘好惡衣。」
The monk said, "Invite the monks and offer the clothing, deciding whether to give good or inferior robes to the elder monks."

若與麁者，正當與沙彌、園民及著衣架上。若與我好者，我當著入王家貴勝邊、當禮佛。
If you give coarse ones, they should be given to novices, garden workers, or placed on the clothing rack. If you give me good ones, I will wear them to visit the noble families and to worship the Buddha.

有人問者，我當語言：『某甲信心優婆夷與我。』汝可得名稱受用功德。」
If someone asks, I will say, 'A certain faithful laywoman gave these to me.' You will gain a reputation and accrue merit."

答言：「更無，正有是，已許僧；若有者亦當別施。」
She replied, "I have nothing more, only what I have promised the monks; if I have more, I would also give separately."

比丘言：「與不與任汝意。」言已便去。
The monk said, "To give or not is up to you." Then he left.

檀越作是念：「若與彼不與僧者，僧是良福田。若不與彼與僧者，彼有王力能作不饒益事。」
The benefactor thought, "If I give to them and not to the monks, the monks are a good field of merit. If I do not give to them and give to the monks, they have royal power and can cause harm."

畏彼故不與僧，因彼發不喜心故二俱不與。
Fearing them, she did not give to the monks, and because of their displeasure, she gave to neither.

諸比丘問乞食比丘：「汝前所聞絕無消息。」
The other monks asked the mendicant monk, "You heard there was no news?"

乞食比丘言：「我知定剋明日。」
The mendicant monk said, "I will find out for sure tomorrow."

乞食比丘明旦，著入聚落衣到其家，即問優婆夷言：「何故不見供辦作諸飯食？」
The next morning, the mendicant monk put on his robes and went to the house, asking the laywoman, "Why do I not see preparations for food offerings?"

答言：「阿闍梨！因難陀、優波難陀破我善心。」
She replied, "Teacher! Because Nanda and Upananda disrupted my good intentions."

問言：「何故？」即具說上事。
He asked, "Why?" She then explained the matter in detail.

乞食比丘聞已，語諸比丘。
Having heard, the mendicant monk informed the other monks.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼難陀、優波難陀來。」
The monks, for this reason, approached the Blessed One, and Buddha said, "Call Nanda and Upananda here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「癡人！此是惡事，汝作二不饒益，施者失福，受者失利。」
The Buddha said, "Foolish people! This is a harmful deed; you have prevented both benefactor and recipient from obtaining merit and benefit."

佛言：「汝常不聞我無量方便毀呰多欲、讚歎少欲，汝云何先不自恣請，而為好故往勸？
The Buddha said, "Have you not frequently heard my teachings on condemning excessive desire and praising contentment? Why did you not first restrain yourselves and instead persuaded for selfish reasons?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is against the Dharma, against the Vinaya, unlike the Buddha's teaching and does not nurture good principles."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All the monks residing in Śrāvastī should gather; for ten benefits, I shall lay down a precept for the monks, so even those who have heard it will hear it again.

為比丘故，若居士、居士婦為辦衣價，如是言：『我辦如是如是衣價，買如是如是衣，與某甲比丘。』
For the sake of the monks, if a layman or laywoman prepares the price for robes, they should state, 'I will prepare robes of such and such price, to buy such and such robes for a certain monk.'

是比丘先不自恣請，為好故便到居士所作如是言：『為我作如是衣，為好故。』若得衣者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
If the monk, without permission, goes and speaks to the layperson saying, 'Make such a robe for me for good reasons,' he has committed an offense entailing expiation."



為比丘者，

For a bhikkhu,

若僧、

whether it be the Sangha,

若眾多、

or many people,

若一人。

or one person.




居士者，如上說。
Lay practitioners, as mentioned above.




衣者，欽婆羅衣、劫貝衣、芻摩衣、憍舍耶衣、舍那衣、麻衣、軀牟提衣。
Clothes include robes made of materials like silk, wool, jute, linen, hemp, cotton, and tree bark.




衣價者，金銀寶物等。
The price of a garment is equivalent to gold, silver, or other treasures.




辦者，若今日、若明日、若半月、若一月，我辦如是如是衣價，買如是如是衣，與某甲比丘，是名辦。
Arrangement is if today, or tomorrow, or half a month, or one month, I arrange such and such clothing prices, buy such and such clothes, and give them to a certain monk, this is called arrangement.




先不自恣請者，先知不自恣請，便謂自恣請。
First, those who did not ask for indulgence knew they did not and called it asking for indulgence.

知自恣請，餘比丘便謂自恣請。
Knowing self-indulgence, other monks called it indulgence.

我知自恣請與餘物，便謂自恣請與我衣。
I know self-indulgence and other things, and called it indulgence with my robe.




往者，若到居士田上、若到家、若入屋裏。
In the past, whether it was arriving at the land of the layperson, or arriving home, or entering the house.




尋求之人，我必須給予青色、黃色、紅色或黑色纖維織物等，以及各種不同的顏色。

The seeker, I must provide blue, yellow, red, black textile fibers, and various different colors.

或長、或寬、或長寬，無論要求什麼，我都願意給予，也可另外增加其他東西。

Whether long, wide, or both, whatever is requested, I am willing to give, and can additionally provide other items.

皆會受制於內部規範。

All will be subject to internal regulations.




為好者，知足好、不知足好、麁足好。

For those who are good, there are those who are content, those who are not content, and those who are rough yet good.

云何知足好？

What does it mean to be content?

若與細衣時便言：「我須麁者。」

If given fine clothes, they immediately say, "I need rough ones."

是名知足好。得者，尼薩耆。

This is called being content and good. Such a person attains Nissaggi.

不知足好者，若與麁衣時便作是言：「若與我麁衣者，不中觸我脚。」

Those who are not content, when given coarse clothes, say: "If you give me rough clothes, they don't fit well on my body."

我是貴人，應與我好衣。」

"I am a noble person, you should give me fine clothes."

是名不知足好，得尼薩耆。

This is called being not content and good, they attain Nissaggi.

麁足好者，若與細衣時便言：「我不用是好衣，我是阿練若，如鹿在林中，住在空地，與我麁者，足障寒熱風雨。」

Those who are rough but good, when given fine clothes, say: "I don't use these fine clothes. I am a forest dweller, like a deer in the forest, living in open spaces. Give me rough clothes, they are enough to shield me from the cold, heat, and rain."

是名麁足好。

This is called being rough but good.

若得者，尼薩耆波夜提。

Such a person attains Nissaggi Paccittiya.



尼薩耆波夜提者，是衣應僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nissaggiya pacittiya refers to robes that should be relinquished among the Sangha; it is an offense entailing confession.

若不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If one confesses without relinquishing, it is a transgression beyond the rule.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pacittiya, as stated above.

是故世尊說：「為比丘故，若居士、居士婦，乃至為好故，若得衣者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Thus, the Blessed One said: "For the sake of a monk, whether laymen or laywomen, even for goodness, if robes are obtained, it is nissaggiya pacittiya."



佛住舍衛城，有乞食比丘，時到著入聚落衣持鉢入城，次行乞食。
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti, where there was a monk who begged for food. When the time came, he put on his robe, took his bowl, and entered the city, going sequentially for alms.

有居士婦語比丘，言如上。
A laywoman said to the monk, the aforementioned words.

一居士中說，此中但二居士為異耳，乃至已聞者當重聞。
In speaking about one layman, this context only differs in there being two laymen, even those who have heard before should hear again.

為比丘故，若二居士、居士婦，各各辦衣價，作如是言：「我等辦如是如是衣價，買如是如是衣，與某甲比丘。」
For the sake of the monk, if two laymen or their wives each prepare the cost of clothing, they would say: "We have prepared such and such amount for clothes, bought such and such clothes, and given them to a certain monk."

是比丘先不自恣請，為好衣故，便到居士所言：「為我各各辦如是如是衣價，共作一衣與我，為好故。」
The monk originally did not request indulgently, but for the sake of good clothes, he went to the laymen and said: "Prepare such and such amount for clothes and together make a robe for me, for quality's sake."

若得是衣，尼薩耆波夜提。
If he accepts these clothes, it constitutes an offense of Nisagi-Pacayika.

此中如上一居士中廣說，但二居士為異耳。
This context is elaborated as with the aforementioned single layman, only it differs with two laymen.



，瓶沙王有二大臣：一名尼提，二名婆利沙。

The Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, and King Prasenajit had two ministers: one named Nīti and the other named Pālorāsha.

秋時人民收穫訖運致入城，天時寒雪。

In autumn, after the people had harvested and transported the produce into the city, the weather turned cold and snowy.

時二大臣作是念：「我常年年請師難陀、優波難陀，施食并施衣，今日當在何處？」

At that time, the two ministers thought, "Every year we invite Masters Nanda and Upananda, offering food and clothes, but where should we find them today?"

有人語言：「在舍衛城。」

Someone said, "They are in the city of Śrāvastī."

爾時大臣遣使，齎書持舊錢八百，餉難陀、優波難陀。

Then the ministers sent a messenger with a letter and eight hundred old coins to present to Nanda and Upananda.

勅使言：「汝當還得報書。」

They instructed the messenger, "You should return with a reply letter."

使向祇桓精舍，到已問言：「難陀、優波難陀房在何處？」

The messenger went to Jeta's Grove Monastery and asked, "Where are Nanda and Upananda's quarters?"

時諸比丘示言：「此房是。」

The monks pointed and said, "That room is theirs."

使即入房中，禮已問言：「是優波難陀不？」

The messenger entered the room, paid respects, and asked, "Are you Upananda?"

答言：「是，汝何以問？」

He replied, "Yes, why do you ask?"

答言：「瓶沙王大臣尼提婆利沙，遣我齎書持舊錢八百餉師，并索答書。」

The messenger said, "Minister Nīti and Pālorāsha of King Prasenajit have sent me with a letter and eight hundred old coins as offerings to you, as well as to request a reply."

時有優婆塞名法豫，優波難陀即語優婆塞言：「汝知料理，數此衣直與書相應不？」

At that time, there was a lay follower named Dharmajoy, and Upananda said to him, "You know the arrangements. Calculate if the value of the clothes matches the letter."

即料計取與書相應，即與答書遣使令去。

After calculating and finding it to match, they gave the reply letter to the messenger and sent him off.

時法豫優婆塞欲去，白言：「尊者！此衣直當置何處？」

When Dharmajoy was about to leave, he said, "Venerable sir! Where should I place the value of these clothes?"

答言：「當置汝邊。」

He replied, "Place it by your side."

即便持去。到家已，待一日、二日、三日不來取。

So he took it and went home. He waited for one day, two days, and three days, but no one came to take it.

優波難陀多緣多事忘不往取，是優婆塞家中小儉，即便貸用後當還償。

Upananda, being preoccupied with other matters, forgot to collect it. The lay follower's family had a small shortage, so they temporarily used it, intending to return it later.

用已即日，難陀語優波難陀往取衣直，即往索。

After using it for a day, Nanda told Upananda to collect the value of the clothes, so he went to retrieve it.

優婆塞言：「我持來已，停待尊者一日、二日、三日不來取，我家中小儉即便貸用，須得當還。」

The lay follower said, "I brought it here and waited for you for one day, two days, three days, but you didn't come. My family had a small shortage, so we used it, but we'll return it."

優波難陀即瞋恚言：「汝不可寄付，此是我物，云何取輒用？」

Upananda angrily said, "You cannot use it as you please; this is my property. How could you just use it?"

難陀謂優波難陀：「此物不可直爾索得。」

Nanda told Upananda, "You cannot demand it directly like this."

即語官人牽挽將去。

Then he asked an official to drag him away.

時眾人見已，種種呵責沙門：「釋子自言善好，是其檀越常相供給，而能苦困如是，況復餘人。

When the people saw this, they reproached the monks in various ways: "These Shakyans claim to be good. Their patrons constantly support them, yet they can cause such distress. How much more to others?

失沙門法，行惡如此，何道之有？」

Losing the principles of a monk and committing such evil, what path do they follow?"

優波難陀聞已羞愧，即便放去。

Upon hearing this, Upananda felt ashamed and let him go.

諸比丘聞已往白世尊，佛言：「呼優波難陀來。」

The monks heard about it and reported it to the Buddha, who said, "Call Upananda here."

來已，佛問優波難陀：「汝實爾不？」

When he arrived, the Buddha asked Upananda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He replied, "Yes, it is true, World-Honored One!"

佛語優波難陀：「此是惡事。

The Buddha said to Upananda, "This is a bad deed.

汝常不聞我無數方便呵責多欲、讚歎少欲？

Have you not heard me countless times admonishing excessive desire and praising contentment?

此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。

This is neither according to the law nor the Vinaya; it is not in line with the Buddha's teachings. It cannot nurture good qualities.

從今已後不聽往索。」

From now on, you are not permitted to go demand such things."



衛城，法豫優婆塞常僧中次第請比丘食。

Further, when the Buddha was residing in Sravasti, lay devotee Fayu frequently invited monks to his home for meals in sequence.

時次食比丘到其家已，法豫問言：「優波難陀何以不來取錢？

When the monk scheduled to eat arrived at his home, Fayu asked, "Why hasn't Upananda come to collect the money?

我未得時乃眾人中苦從我索，我今得直而不來取。」

When I hadn't obtained money, people were harshly demanding it from me, but now that I have it, he doesn't even bother to come and collect it."

諸比丘言：「佛制戒不得來索。」

The monks replied, "The Buddha has established a precept that forbids monks from soliciting donations."

法豫言：「若不聽索者，何不來此默然？我自知意。」

Fayu said, "If coming to ask directly is not allowed, why don't they come and remain silent? I would understand their intention."

是比丘食已還語諸比丘，諸比丘聞已即以是事往白世尊。

After eating, the monk returned and informed the other monks, who then reported the matter to the Buddha.

佛告諸比丘：「是法豫優婆塞，聰明黠慧乃有是方便。

The Buddha said to the monks, "This lay devotee Fayu is clever and resourceful in such matters.

從今日聽諸比丘三反往索，六反默然住。」

From today, monks are allowed to ask three times, and if still unheeded, remain silently for six visits."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城比丘皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha addressed the monks, "Gather all the monks residing in Sravasti; for the sake of ten benefits, I establish this precept for the monks, and even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

為比丘故，若王、若大臣，遣使送衣直與比丘，使到比丘所白言：『尊者！是衣直，若王、若大臣所送，尊者受是衣價。』

For the benefit of monks, if a king or minister sends a message along with the price of a robe to a monk, the messenger should inform the monk: 'Venerable, this is the price of the robe sent by the king or minister, and you are to receive this robe value.'

是比丘應語使如是言：『諸比丘法不應受衣價，我須衣時得清淨衣，須者得自手受作比丘衣畜。』

The monk should respond to the messenger saying, 'According to the monk's code, we should not receive the price of robes; when I need a robe, I will receive a pure robe by hand as the attire of a monk.'

使語比丘言：『尊者有執事人，常為諸比丘執事不？』

The messenger should ask the monk, 'Venerable, is there an attendant who usually handles affairs for monks?'

是比丘應示使執事人、若園民、若優婆塞，應語使者言：『是人等能為諸比丘執事。』

The monk should identify an attendant, whether a gardener or lay devotee, and tell the messenger, 'These individuals can handle affairs for the monks.'

使到執事人所語言：『善哉！執事，如是如是衣價，買如是如是衣，與某甲比丘。是比丘須衣時當來取，當與衣。』

The messenger should go to the attendant and say, 'Good, attendant, such and such is the price of the robe; purchase this kind of robe and give it to such and such monk. When the monk needs a robe, he will come to get it, and it should be given to him.'

是使若自勸喻、若使人勸喻已，還到比丘所白言：『尊者所示執事人，我已勸喻作衣竟，尊者須衣時往取，當與尊者衣。』

The messenger, having either personally encouraged the attendant or having sent someone else to encourage, returns to the monk and reports, 'Venerable, I have persuaded the attendant you identified to make the robe; when you need a robe, go and retrieve it, and it will be given to you.'

須衣比丘應到執事人所索衣，應作是言：『我須衣。』

The monk in need of a robe should go to the attendant to request it, saying, 'I need a robe.'

第二、第三亦如是索。

Repeat this request the second and third time in the same manner.

若得衣者好；若不得，第四、第五、第六應在執事前默然立。

If you obtain the robe, that is good; if not, on the fourth, fifth, and sixth attempts, stand silently in front of the attendant.

得衣者好；若不得，為得衣故過是求，若得是衣，尼薩耆波夜提。

It's good if you get the robe; if not, and if further attempts to obtain the robe are successful, it results in a Nisagiya Pacittiya offense.

若不得衣，隨衣價來處，若自去、若遣使往，應作是言：『汝為某甲比丘送衣價，某甲比丘竟不得。汝自知財莫使失，是事法爾。』

If you still do not receive a robe, return to the one who sent the robe price, either personally or by sending someone, and say: 'You sent the price of a robe to such and such monk, and that monk couldn't obtain it. You should take care of the funds to prevent loss; that's the proper way for things to be handled.'



比丘者，若僧、若眾多、若一人。
A bhikkhu, whether in a community, in large numbers, or alone.




王者，如盜戒中說。
Kings, as mentioned in the Thief's Discipline.




王臣者，乃至小吏，帥知任官事者皆名為臣。
Noble ministers, and even minor officials, those who understand their official duties, are all called ministers.




使者，若男、若女、若大、若小、若在家、若出家。
Envoys, whether male, female, adult, child, at home, or away from home.




衣者，如上說。
Clothing, as mentioned above.




衣價者，錢、金銀、𨭛珠、琉璃、珂貝、珊瑚、琥珀、硨磲、馬瑙、赤寶、銅鐵、白鑞、鉛錫等，是名衣價。
The value of clothing includes things like money, gold and silver, pearls, glass, shells, coral, amber, conch shells, agate, red gems, copper and iron, white tin, lead, and tin; this is known as the value of clothing.




園民者，供養眾僧淨人，是名園民。
A gardener is someone who supports and nourishes the monks, and is called a gardener.




优婆塞者，三归一分行、少分行、多分行、满分行、随顺行此法，是名优婆塞。
An upāsaka is one who follows the practice of the Three Refuges in one part, a small part, a large part, a complete part, or adaptively; this is called an upāsaka.




三語者，非一往反中三語，

Trilingual people do not represent understanding three languages in one try,

乃至三往反索是名三語。

but rather thrice seeking and reflecting, they are called trilingual.




若四五六反默然者，非一往默然，乃至六反往默然；  
If the fourth to sixth times return in silence, it is not a one-time silence, but rather six returns in silence;

一自往索、一遣使默然住；  
One goes to search by oneself, one sends a messenger to remain in silence;

一自往索、二遣使默然住；  
One goes to search by oneself, two send messengers to remain in silence;

一自往索、三遣使默然住；  
One goes to search by oneself, three send messengers to remain in silence;

一自往索、四遣使默然住；  
One goes to search by oneself, four send messengers to remain in silence;

一自往索、五遣使默然住；  
One goes to search by oneself, five send messengers to remain in silence;

一自往索、六遣使默然住。  
One goes to search by oneself, six send messengers to remain in silence.

二自往索門、三自往索門亦如是。  
When two go to search by themselves, three doors are also like this.

一遣使索、一自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, one goes by oneself to remain in silence;

一遣使索、二自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, two go by themselves to remain in silence;

一遣使索、三自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, three go by themselves to remain in silence;

一遣使索、四自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, four go by themselves to remain in silence;

一遣使往索、五自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, five go by themselves to remain in silence;

一遣使索、六自往默然住；  
One sends a messenger to search, six go by themselves to remain in silence;

二遣使索門、三遣使索門亦如是。  
When two send messengers to search, three doors are also like this.

自往索、自往默然住，三門亦如是。  
Going to search by oneself, remaining in silence, the three doors are also like this.

遣使索、遣使默然住，三門亦如是。  
Sending a messenger to search, sending a messenger to remain in silence, the three doors are also like this.



三反往索六默然住時，或緩期、或急期。

Three times asking and six times silently abiding, sometimes with a relaxed deadline, sometimes with an urgent one.

云何緩急？

What do relaxed and urgent mean?

若比丘至檀越所索衣時，語言：「長壽！與我衣直。」

If a monk goes to a lay supporter to ask for cloth, saying, "Venerable! Give me the price of the robe."

答言：「尊者！更一月來。」

The layperson responds, "Reverend! Come back in a month."

比丘滿一月往索，若檀越復言：「更一月來。」

The monk returns after a month to ask again, and the layperson says, "Come back in another month."

比丘滿一月復往索，若檀越復言：「尊者更一月來。」

The monk returns after another month to ask again, and the layperson says, "Venerable, come back in another month."

比丘滿一月復往索，過三月已不得復索。

If the monk returns after another month without receiving it after three months, he should not ask again.

若言：「半月來。」

If they say, "Come back in half a month."

過三半月不得復索。

After three half-months pass, he should not ask again.

若言：「十日。」

If they say, "Ten days."

若言：「五日、四日、三日、二日、一日、須臾。」

Or if they say, "Five days, four days, three days, two days, one day, a moment."

過三須臾。不得復索。

After three moments pass, he should not ask again.

是比丘六反往，時檀越言：「我知尊者住立意，更一月來。」

If this monk goes six times, the layperson might say, "I know the Reverend's intention, come back in another month."

是比丘滿一月復往默然住，如是滿六月往默然已，不得復往。

The monk returns after a month to silently stand, and after completing six months of silent standing, he should not go again.

若言：「半月。」

If they say, "Half a month."

若言：「十日、五日、四日、三日、二日、一日、須臾。」

Or if they say, "Ten days, five days, four days, three days, two days, one day, a moment."

過六須臾已，不得復往默然住。

After six moments have passed, he should not silently stand again.

齊幾名默然住？

How long is it considered silently standing?

時如人入庫取物著髻上頃，又如裹襆物頃即應去。

As long as it takes for a person to enter a storeroom to pick up something on their head or to bundle their belongings, they should leave.

若比丘作方便現行相，持衣鉢錫杖水瓶過寄物人前，若彼人問言：「尊者欲那去？」

If a monk uses skillful means by showing his robe, bowl, walking staff, or water pitcher to the depositor, and the person asks, "Reverend, where are you going?"

答言：「欲去先送物主邊，語令自知此物，莫使失。」

The monk replies, "I am going to return this to the owner, informing them of this item to prevent loss."

受寄者言：「久已辦物，不須復往。」

The custodian replies, "The arrangements are long done; no need to go again."

即時與物比丘，取者，尼薩耆波夜提。

If they immediately give the object to the monk, the receiver incurs a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若不作方便，道由彼前，若彼人問：「尊者那去？」

If he doesn't use skillful means, but passes by, the person asks, "Reverend, where are you going?"

答言：「欲至先送物主邊，語令自知此物，莫使失。」

He replies, "I am going to take this to its owner, to make them aware of it so it won't be lost."

受寄者言：「久已辦物，不須復往。」

The custodian replies, "The arrangements are long done; no need to go again."

即時與物，取者無罪。

If they immediately give the object, the receiver is blameless.

受寄者若言：「任意去！設能破我如破多羅樹，亦不與汝一錢。」

If the custodian says, "Go at your will! Even if you can destroy me like felling a palm tree, I will not give you a coin."

比丘爾時應到物主邊語，令自知此物莫使失。

The monk should then go to the owner, informing them of this item so it won't be lost.

若是物主言：「我先施比丘，隨方便更索。」

If the owner says, "I first gave to the monk, he can ask as he pleases."

比丘爾時得如前三反語索、六反默然住。

The monk then can do three verbal requests and six times silently abiding as before.

是故世尊說：「若王、若大臣，送衣直乃至莫使失，是事應當爾。」

Therefore, the Blessed One said, "Whether it's a king or a minister, send the price of a robe, so that it won't be lost, and these things should be done accordingly."

是初跋渠竟。

Thus ends the first chapter of the Vinaya rules.



佛住毘舍離大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。

The Buddha was residing in the Great Wood Monastery with a layered pavilion in Vaishali, expounding broadly as above.

爾時諸比丘一切作氈衣僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、尼師檀，唯除漉水囊及絡囊，一切氈作。

At that time, all the monks made their robes, upper garments, inner garments, and seat spreads entirely from woolen felt, except for water strainers and carrying bags.

諸比丘處處乞羊毛作氈衣，如是眾多，為世人所厭。

The monks begged for wool everywhere to make felt garments in such large quantities that it made people in society feel annoyed.

時有一比丘，晨起著入聚落衣入毘舍離，為乞毛故。

Then there was a monk who, dressed in his village attire, went into Vaishali to beg for wool in the morning.

有一估客手執戶鉤來向市肆開自店舍，遙見比丘疾行而來。

A merchant, holding a door hook, was heading to his shop in the market and saw the monk hurriedly approaching from afar.

估客念言：「是比丘來必為乞毛故，晨朝至此，市賣未售，誰能先乞是毛。」

The merchant thought to himself, "This monk is surely coming to beg for wool. It's early morning and the market hasn't started selling yet. Who's going to beg for wool first?"

便閉肆戶還自家去。

So he closed the shop door and returned to his home.

比丘念言：「是估客見我便閉肆戶還去，不欲乞我毛故。」

The monk thought, "The merchant saw me and closed his shop door to avoid giving me wool."

便於餘道往截，至前問言：「長壽！汝何處去？不得相置，我從何誰乞毛？

Then he took another path and blocked him, asking, "Long Life! Where are you going? If you don't give it to me, from whom can I beg for wool?"

正欲從汝乞。汝等信佛法者，知有罪福行業果報而不與我，誰當與我？

I really intend to beg from you. You believers in the Buddha's teachings know the cause and effect of deeds, merits, and retributions. If you don't give it to me, who will?"

長壽當知！如世尊說，當起慈心，不樂聞者方便使聞，諸不信者教令立信，乃至手總其頭強勸令施。

Long Life, you should know! As the World-Honored One said, you should raise a compassionate heart, make those who don't like to hear conveniently hear, instruct those who don't believe to establish faith, and even forcefully persuade others to give with a gentle tap on their heads.

所以然者，彼於此終當生天上，色力受命眷屬自然。

The reason is that they would ultimately be reborn in heaven, with natural beauty, strength, longevity, and followers.

來生人中亦受快樂，色力壽命、眷屬成就，修習佛法增益功德，逮甘露果。

In the human world, they will also receive happiness, with beauty, strength, longevity, and followers, cultivating the Buddha's teachings to increase merits and attain the fruit of the ambrosia.

是故長壽！世尊說言：

Therefore, Long Life! The World-Honored One has spoken these words:



為福受樂報，  
Good fortune leads to rewards and enjoyment,

所欲皆自然；  
All desires are fulfilled naturally;




超踰生死流，
Transcend the flow of life and death,

上寂之涅槃。
Reach the tranquil nirvana.



若人為福者，　　

If a person seeks to do good,

天神自然護；

The celestial beings will naturally protect them.




所願皆自成，
All wishes come true on their own,

眾魔莫能壞。
No demons can ruin them.




薄福多諸惱，  
With little fortune, one encounters many troubles.

福能消諸患；  
Fortune can eliminate many afflictions.




福德既牢強，
When blessings and merits are firm and strong,

速成堅固定。
they are quickly solidified and stable.




生天受快樂，  
In heaven one experiences joy,  

人中亦自在；  
Among people there is also freedom;  




由此功德因缘，　　他所去之地皆自然成办。
Due to the merit of these deeds, wherever he goes, all things naturally come to fruition.




因斯福方便，  
Because of the expedient means,

永離生死苦；  
forever separate from the suffering of birth and death.  




得道至涅槃，
Achieving enlightenment reaches Nirvana,

不沒不復生。
Neither vanishes nor is reborn.

」」



爾時比丘說是偈已，復言：「長壽！施我羊毛其福最大。」
At that time, the monk recited this verse and said, "Long life! Granting me wool brings the greatest fortune."

是時估客聞說法已即施少毛。
At that time, the merchant, hearing the discourse, gave a little wool.

爾時估客作是思惟：「若入市肆便多乞毛，更不得利，折減錢本，寧坐家住可全其本，故勝市中子本俱失。」
Then the merchant thought, "If I enter the market and they ask for more wool, I will no longer gain profit, and it would diminish my capital. It is better to sit at home and preserve my capital than to lose everything in the market."

作是念已，便還家坐。
With this thought, he returned home and sat.

時估客婦瞋其夫言：「何以詣市速疾來歸？如是懶墮何由得活男女、充官賦役？」
The merchant's wife angrily said to her husband, "Why did you return so quickly from the market? How can you support the family and meet your civic duties if you are so lazy?"

估客答言：「莫瞋，且聽！我今朝晨詣市店肆，廣說上事，乃至不如還家坐住。」
The merchant replied, "Do not be angry, just listen! I went to the market early today, explained the situation in full, and realized it is better to return home and sit."

其婦聞已默然而止。
Hearing this, his wife quietly stopped speaking.

是時尊者舍利弗次第乞食，至估客舍於門中住。
Then the venerable Sariputra was begging for alms in order and stood at the merchant’s house at the door.

爾時估客婦篤信恭敬，識舍利弗，即持器盛食，出門著舍利弗鉢中，頭面禮足恭敬問訊。
At that time, the merchant's wife, with deep faith and respect, recognized Sariputra, took a vessel filled with food, and placed it in Sariputra's bowl, bowing to his feet and asking respectfully.

時舍利弗亦慰勞之：「家中何如，生活好不？」
Sariputra also comforted her, saying, "How is everything at home? Is life good?"

其婦答言：「家內悉佳，但生理頓弊。」
The woman replied, "Everything is fine at home, but the business has declined."

問：「何以故？」
Sariputra asked, "Why is that?"

即以上因緣具白舍利弗：「居家生活飲食衣服、供官賦稅，正仰市肆。而今夫主在家中住，畏人乞羊毛，實在言行、實覺言眠。」
She then explained the reason to Sariputra, "Our family's livelihood, food and clothing, and taxes depend on the market. Now my husband stays at home fearing people asking for wool, making it hard to distinguish truth from lies while awake or asleep."

師今是我家所供養恭敬尊重，無所藏隱。
"As a respected teacher, we hold you in high esteem and have nothing to hide from you."

又毛大貴，或一錢得一兩，乃至二、三、四金錢得一兩，然此毛極細軟，觸眼睛不淚出甚為難得。
"Moreover, the wool is very expensive; sometimes one coin buys one ounce, up to two, three, or four coins for an ounce. This wool is extremely fine and soft, yet it is very difficult to obtain."

尊者！此羊毛出四大國：毘舍離國、弗迦羅國、得剎尸邏國、難提跋陀國。
"Venerable! This wool comes from four great countries: the nation of Vaisali, the nation of Vajji, the nation of Kuru, and the nation of Kamboja."

尊者！我夫主及諸親屬，為求是毛故，或時得還、或死不還。
"Venerable! My husband and relatives sometimes return and sometimes do not survive in pursuit of this wool."

以毛難得，是故極貴。
"Because the wool is hard to obtain, it is very expensive."

而諸比丘人人來乞，破我家業，遂至窮乏。」
"But when all the monks come to ask for it, our family business is ruined, leading to poverty."

爾時尊者舍利弗，廣為說法令發歡喜，即還精舍。
At that time, Venerable Sariputra expounded the Dharma extensively to bring joy and then returned to the temple.

食後以上因緣具白世尊，佛言：「呼是比丘來。」
After the meal, he reported the situation to the Blessed One who said, "Bring this monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實作氈衣乞羊毛，乃至估客婦向舍利弗說不？」
After he came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Did you indeed ask for wool to make a robe, as the merchant's wife told Sariputra?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, "Indeed, Blessed One!"

佛言：「比丘！汝常不聞我以無數方便，呵責多欲、讚歎少欲耶？」
The Buddha said, "Monk! Have you not often heard me use countless means to criticize desire and praise contentment?"

此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。
"This is not according to the Dharma, not according to the Vinaya, not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings, and it does not nurture good qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」
The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing in Vaisali should gather; let the precepts be established for the benefit of the monks so that those who have heard them will hear them again."

若比丘純黑羊毛作新敷具者，尼薩耆波夜提。
"If a monk uses pure black wool to make new items, it should be confessed as an offense."



比丘者，如上說。  
Bhikkhus, as stated above.  




純者，不雜羊毛者有十種：
There are ten types of pure sheep, those without mixed wool:

相續羊、
Continuous sheep,

羖羊、
Ram,

不具色羊、
Colorless sheep,

山羊、
Mountain goat,

遊行羊、
Wandering sheep,

羺羊、
Wild sheep,

等羊、
Equal sheep,

鳴羊、
Bellowing sheep,

眾多耳羊、
Many-eared sheep,

木蓮羊。
Wood lotus sheep.




新者，初成也。  
New things are initially complete.  




敷具者，氈也。
As for coverings, they are felt blankets.




作者，若自作、若使人作。
The author, whether creating on their own or having someone else do it.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是敷具應眾僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nissaggiya Pācittiya refers to relinquishing items that should be given up to the assembly of monks, and the offense of Pācittiya requires confession.

若不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If one does not give them up but confesses, it constitutes a breach of the Vinaya rules.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pācittiya, as mentioned above.



相續羊者有六種毛：生青、染青、生黑、染黑、生青黑、染青黑。
Sheep raised continuously have six types of wool: naturally blue, dyed blue, naturally black, dyed black, naturally blue-black, dyed blue-black.

若自作、若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提。
Whether made by oneself or by someone else, making them leads to Nisaghiya Pacittiya.

受用，越比尼罪。
Using them incurs a Bhikkhuni offense.

乃至木蓮羊亦如是。
Even wool from cotton flowers (possibly a metaphor) is the same.

此敷具應眾僧中捨，眾僧不應還，亦不得餘用。
This mat should be relinquished among the sangha, should not be returned by the sangha, nor used for other purposes.

正得敷地及作遮向簾帳幔。
It should properly be used for spreading on the ground or made into a curtain or canopy.

是故說：「若比丘純黑羊毛作新敷具者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
Thus it is said: "If a bhikkhu makes a new mat of pure black wool, it leads to Nisaghiya Pacittiya."




佛住毘舍離大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。
Buddha stayed at the multi-storied monastery in the great forest of Vaishali, expounding extensively as above.

爾時比丘作一切氈衣，僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、尼師檀，唯除漉水囊及絡囊，餘一切氈作。
At that time, the monks made all kinds of felt clothing, Kasaya (monk's robe), Uttarasanga, Antariya, Nisidana, except for water-filter bags and cord bags, all were made of felt.

佛未制戒前，爾時諸比丘著氈衣，露地如庵慢安隱住。
Before the Buddha established the precepts, at that time the monks wore felt clothing, and lived comfortably in the open as if under a shelter.

制戒已，不復著氈衣故，多病不安隱住。
After the precepts were established, due to not wearing felt clothes anymore, they often fell ill and lived uncomfortably.

即以是事語尊者阿難：「佛未制戒時，我等著氈衣，猶如屋下得安隱住。
Immediately, they spoke to Venerable Ananda about this matter: "Before the Buddha set the precepts, we wore felt clothes and lived comfortably as if under a roof.

佛制戒已，不復得氈衣，故多病不安隱。
After the Buddha set the precepts, we no longer had felt clothes, thus often fell ill and lived uncomfortably.

善哉阿難！當為我等具白世尊，還聽持氈衣。」
Good Ananda! Please tell the Blessed One on our behalf, to allow us to wear felt clothes again."

爾時尊者阿難往至佛所，頭面禮足，即以上事具白世尊：「唯願世尊！聽諸比丘還得著氈衣。」
At that time, Venerable Ananda went to the Buddha, respectfully bowed at his feet, and conveyed this matter: "I wish that the Blessed One allows the monks to wear felt clothes again."

佛言：「聽諸比丘雜作。」
The Buddha said, "I allow the monks to make them assorted."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing in Vaishali, gather together. For ten benefits, I set the precepts for the monks, and even those who have already heard them should hear again.

若比丘欲作新敷具，應用二分純黑羺羊毛、第三分白、第四分下。
If a monk wishes to make a new covering, he should use two parts pure black goat wool, the third part white, and the fourth part inferior.

若比丘不用二分純黑羺羊毛、第三分白、第四分下，作新敷具者，尼薩耆波夜提。」
If a monk does not use two parts pure black goat wool, the third part white, and the fourth part inferior, to make a new covering, he commits a Nissaggiya Pacittiya offense."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as stated above.




新者，初作敷具者。
The new one, first-time creator of implements.




毋作者，工匠之事。

Do not create, for it is the craftsman's task.

故云者，制流之別。

Therefore, it is said, the distinction of crafting styles.

生斯可致，無曰可賦。

What is born can be achieved, never say what can be granted.

行此故矣，而勉者從之。

Practice this and diligent ones will follow.




純者，不雜。  
The pure one is not mixed.




羊毛者，十種，如上說。
As for wool, there are ten kinds, as mentioned above.

二分者，多用黑毛而作等想，等用作減想而更益；
As for the second part, mostly black wool is used to make such ideas, equally used to reduce ideas and further increase;

第三分白者，多用白毛而作等想，等用作減想而更益；
For the third part, mostly white wool is used to make such ideas, equally used to reduce ideas and further increase;

第四分下者，少用下毛而作等想，如是作新敷具。
For the fourth part below, little inferior wool is used to create such ideas, thus creating new coverings.

若自作、若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提。
Whether made by oneself or by others, after completion, it is Nisaggiya Pacittiya.

受用，犯越比尼罪。
Use results in the offense of transgression of the Vinaya.



尼薩耆波夜提者，是敷具應僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nissaggiya Pacittiya offense refers to the material that should be relinquished among the monks and such an offense should be repented.

不捨而悔者，越比尼罪。
If one repents without relinquishing it, it is an offense against the monastic precepts.

波夜提者，如上說。
Pacittiya offense is as stated above.




前四種羊毛眾僧中捨，僧不得還，亦不得餘用。
The first four types of wool should be relinquished to the monks; the monks should not return them, nor should they use them for other purposes.

正得敷地及作遮向簾帳幔。
They are meant for spreading on the ground or making curtains for privacy.

後六種亦眾僧中捨，僧不應還，僧得用；
The latter six types should also be relinquished to the monks; the monks should not return them, but they may use them.

不得用儭身著，是故說。
They should not be used for clothing oneself, this is how it is explained.



佛住毘舍離大林重閣精舍。

Buddha lived in the Kapilavastu with many dwellings in Vesāli.

爾時有比丘欲作氈，羊毛少，諸比丘問言：「作氈竟未？」

At that time, there was a monk who wanted to make a felt mat, but he had little wool. Other monks asked him, "Have you finished making the felt?"

答言：「未竟。」問：「何以故？」

He answered, "Not yet." They asked, "Why not?"

答言：「羊毛少。」諸比丘語言：「汝欲使作氈細軟暖不？」

He said, "There is little wool." The monks said, "Do you want the felt to be soft and warm?"

答言：「欲爾。」諸比丘語言：「汝去到廣野聚落，乞憍舍耶合羊毛作。」

He said, "Yes, I do." The monks said, "You should go to the settlement in the open fields and ask for some quality wool to make it."

即如其言到廣野聚落，往到憍舍耶家語言：「長壽！施我憍舍耶？」

So he went to the settlement as they told him and went to a house where he said, "Householder! Could you give me some quality wool?"

答言：「小住，待取憍舍耶還，當與。」

The householder replied, "Wait a moment; I will get the quality wool and give it to you."

是比丘在外須臾復來問：「還未？」

The monk waited outside for a while and then came in to ask, "Is it ready?"

答言：「始還，待我小息，須煮竟，當與。」

The householder replied, "I just got it; let me rest for a bit and boil it, then I'll give it to you."

其家有机讓比丘坐，即坐小待，復起以指內釜中看湯熱不？

The householder's family offered the monk a seat, so he sat down to wait, and then got up to check if the water in the pot was hot by dipping a finger in.

即語言：「湯已熱，可著繭。」

Then they said, "The water is hot; you can put the cocoon in now."

主人欲嗤弄比丘故，問言：「尊者，湯實熱可著不？」

The host wanted to tease the monk and asked, "Venerable, is the water really hot enough to put in?"

答言：「實熱，可與。」

The monk replied, "It is indeed hot; you can use it."

主人即持繭內釜中，啾啾作聲。

The host put the cocoon into the pot, and a sizzling sound was heard.

主人嫌言：「我聞沙門瞿曇，無數方便讚歎不殺、毀呰殺者。」

The host said disdainfully, "I heard that the ascetic Gautama praises non-killing in various ways and condemns killing."

云何沙門釋子，故殺眾生失沙門法？何道之有？

How can a follower of Gautama cause the loss of monastic rules by killing living beings? What way is there?

主人無歡喜心，正施少許。

The host, with no joy in his heart, gave only a little offering.

比丘得已，即合作敷具。

After receiving it, the monk made it into a mat.

諸比丘復問：「汝作敷具竟未？」

Other monks asked again, "Have you finished making the mat?"

答言：「已竟。但於作中少利多過。」

He replied, "Yes, I have. But in the making, there was little benefit and more fault."

諸比丘問言：「云何少利多過？」

The monks asked, "How is there little benefit and more fault?"

即具說上事。

He then explained the matter in detail.

諸比丘聞已往白世尊，佛言：「呼此比丘來。」

After hearing this, the monks went to inform the Buddha, who said, "Call this monk here."

來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」

When he came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」

He replied, "Yes, World-honored One!"

佛言：「此是惡事，汝常不聞我無數方便呵責殺生、讚歎不殺？

The Buddha said, "This is a bad deed. Have you not always heard me condemn killing and praise non-killing in numerous ways?"

汝今云何乃作此惡事？

How can you now do such a bad deed?

此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」

This is not lawful, not according to the rules, not following the teachings of the Buddha, and cannot cultivate good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all those relying on Vesāli, and for the benefit of ten things, establish a rule for the monks. Even those who have heard it should hear it again.

若比丘以憍舍耶雜純黑羊毛，作新敷具，尼薩耆波夜提。」

If a monk mixes black wool with quality wool to make a new mat, he commits an offense.




比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as mentioned above. 




憍舍耶雜者，憍舍耶有二種：一者生，二者作。
The term 'Kausheya' refers to two types: the natural and the manufactured.

生者，細糸。
The natural variety is fine thread.

作者，紡糸。
The manufactured variety is spun thread.




羊者，十種，如上說。
Sheep, there are ten kinds, as mentioned above.




新者，初成。
The new, is just formed.




敷具者，氈。

As for the item used for covering, it is felt.




作者，若自作、若使人作。
The doer, whether doing it oneself or having others do it.

作成，尼薩耆波夜提。
Upon completion, it results in a transgression.

受用，越比尼罪。
Using it, one commits a disciplinary offense.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是敷具應僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nisagi bocatya: The equipment should be relinquished among the assembly, and the offense should be confessed.

若不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If not relinquished and confessed, a transgression of the Vinaya occurs.




若比丘，用憍舍耶作僧伽梨，羊毛作欝多羅僧。
If a monk uses kausheya to make a sanghati and wool to make an uttarasanga,

若羊毛作僧伽梨，憍舍耶作欝多羅僧，若自作、若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提；受用，越比尼罪。
or wool to make a sanghati and kausheya to make an uttarasanga, whether made by themselves or by others, once completed, it is a Nisaggiyā Pācittiya offense; using it results in a transgression of a lesser offense.

若比丘用憍舍耶作僧伽梨，羊毛作安陀會；若用羊毛作僧伽梨，憍舍耶作安陀會。
If a monk uses kausheya to make a sanghati, wool to make an antarvasa; or uses wool to make a sanghati and kausheya to make an antarvasa,

若自作、若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提；受用，越比尼罪。
whether made by themselves or by others, once completed, it is a Nisaggiyā Pācittiya offense; using it results in a transgression of a lesser offense.

若經是憍舍耶、緯是羊毛，若經是羊毛、緯是憍舍耶，若自作、若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提；受用，越比尼罪。
If the warp is kausheya and the weft is wool, or the warp is wool and the weft is kausheya, whether made by themselves or by others, once completed, it is a Nisaggiyā Pācittiya offense; using it results in a transgression of a lesser offense.

若邊是羊毛、中是憍舍耶，若中是羊毛、邊是憍舍耶，若自作，若使人作，作成，尼薩耆波夜提；受用，越比尼罪。
If the border is wool and the middle is kausheya, or the middle is wool and the border is kausheya, whether made by themselves or by others, once completed, it is a Nisaggiyā Pācittiya offense; using it results in a transgression of a lesser offense.

若憍舍耶間紃、羊毛中，羊毛間紃、憍舍耶中，亦如上說。
If kausheya is used for the strands and wool for the middle, or wool for the strands and kausheya for the middle, it is as said above.

若衣是羊毛、緣是憍舍耶，若衣是羊毛、紐褋是憍舍耶，若衣是羊毛、補是憍舍耶，若自作、若使人作，皆如上說。
If the garment is wool and the edge is kausheya, if the garment is wool and the cords are kausheya, if the garment is wool and the patch is kausheya, whether made by themselves or by others, it is as said above.

此氈衣眾僧中捨，僧不得用，亦不應還，得敷地及作遮向簾帳幔，是故說。
This woolen garment should be relinquished among the assembly of monks, the monks should not use it, nor should it be returned; it can be used to spread on the ground or for making a curtain, thus it is said.




大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the Great Forest Monastery with multiple layers in Vesali, explaining extensively as above.

以五事利益故，世尊五日一行諸比丘房。
For the benefit of five matters, the World Honored One traveled to the monks' quarters once every five days.

爾時世尊行房，見故氈處處在地、糞掃中、故屋中、屋簷下，烏鳥銜作巢、鼠曳入穴。
At that time, the World Honored One was walking through the rooms and saw old mats scattered on the ground, in the sweeping dung, in old buildings, and under the eaves, with birds nesting in them and mice dragging them into holes.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「此是何等故氈處處狼藉？」
The Buddha, knowing this, asked the monks, "Why are these old mats scattered everywhere?"

比丘言：「世尊！此是諸比丘捨棄故氈，為好故更作新敷具。」
The monks replied, "World Honored One! These are the old mats discarded by the monks, who prefer to make new furnishings."

佛告諸比丘：「從今日作新敷具，應至六年持。」
The Buddha told the monks, "From today, when you make new furnishings, they should be used for up to six years.


衛城，廣說如上。  
Furthermore, Buddha resided in Shravasti, teaching extensively as above.  

爾時有一比丘，老病持重氈僧伽梨。  
At that time, there was a monk, old and sick, holding a heavy woolen robe.  

諸比丘語言：「汝持是重氈僧伽梨當乏死，可捨是氈，持輕僧伽梨。」  
The monks said, "You are carrying this heavy woolen robe and will die from exhaustion. You should abandon this woolen robe and hold a lighter one."  

是比丘答言：「未滿六年。」  
The monk replied, "Not yet six years."  

復言：「汝不捨此衣當乏死。」  
They reiterated, "If you don’t abandon this robe, you will die of exhaustion."  

答言：「我寧死，不敢違戒。」  
He replied, "I would rather die than dare to violate the precepts."  

諸比丘即以是事具白世尊。  
The monks reported this matter fully to the World-Honored One.  

佛告諸比丘：「是老病比丘為著重氈衣增病者，僧應當與作氈衣羯磨。  
Buddha told the monks, "If the old and sick monk becomes more ill from wearing the heavy woolen robe, the community should perform the robe procedure.  

是比丘應從僧乞，僧與作求聽羯磨。」  
This monk should request from the community, and they will perform the hearing procedure.  

羯磨者應如是說：「大德僧聽！比丘某甲老病，氈衣重故增病羸瘦。  
The procedure should be stated as: "Venerable community, listen! Monk so-and-so is old and sick, and the heavy woolen robe increases his illness and emaciation.  

若僧時到，僧聽某甲比丘欲從僧乞氈衣羯磨。  
If the community is in session, listen as monk so-and-so wishes to request for a robe procedure.  

諸大德聽！某甲比丘欲從僧乞氈衣羯磨，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」  
Venerable ones, listen! Monk so-and-so wishes to request a robe procedure from the community, and as the community silently agrees, proceed in this way."  

此比丘應從僧乞，偏袒右肩右膝著地，作如是言：  
This monk should request from the community, with the right shoulder bare and the right knee on the ground, saying:  

「我某甲比丘老病，氈衣重羸瘦增病，我今僧中乞氈衣羯磨，願僧與我氈衣羯磨。」  
"I, monk so-and-so, am old and sick, the woolen robe is heavy and increases my emaciation, I now request the community for a robe procedure, may the order grant me the robe procedure."  

如是第二、第三乞。  
Do this request a second and third time.  

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘老病氈衣重，已從僧中乞氈衣羯磨。  
The one carrying out the procedure should say: "Venerable community, listen! Monk so-and-so is old and sick, the woolen robe is heavy, and he has already requested a robe procedure from the community.  

若僧時到，僧與某甲比丘氈衣羯磨，白如是。」如是白三羯磨。  
If the community is in session, grant monk so-and-so the robe procedure. Thus it is declared." Say this for three procedures.  

佛問諸比丘：「已與老病比丘氈衣羯磨未？」  
Buddha asked the monks, "Have you granted the robe procedure to the old and sick monk?"  

答言：「已與。」  
They replied, "It has been granted."  




佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者盡集，
The Buddha told the monks: "Those based in the city of Shravasti, gather completely,

以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
for the sake of ten benefits, I establish rules for the monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。
so that those who have heard before should hear again.

若比丘作新敷具，應至六年持，
If a monk makes a new mat, it should be kept for up to six years,

若減六年，故敷具若捨、若不捨作新敷具，
if less than six years, whether the old mat is discarded or not, a new mat may be made,

除僧羯磨，尼薩耆波夜提。」
except through a Sangha act, it becomes an offense requiring confession."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as previously stated.




新者，初成。
The new one has just been formed.




敷具者，氈。
The covering is a felt mat.




作者，若自作、若使人作。
The author, whether self-created or made by others.




六年者，六夏，夏四月當屋下住，為氈故夜應三出，不得初夜并三出。
For six years, during the six summers, one should live under a roof in the fourth month of summer, where it is customary to go out three times at night for the sake of the mat, but one must not go out in the early night including all three times.

初夜出，中夜、後夜不出，二越比尼罪。
If one goes out in the early night and does not go out in the middle or later night, it is a minor offense twice.

中夜出，初夜、後夜不出，亦二越比尼罪。
If one goes out in the middle night and does not go out in the early or later night, it is also a minor offense twice.

後夜出，初夜、中夜不出，亦二越比尼罪。
If one goes out in the later night and does not go out in the early or middle night, it is also a minor offense twice.

初、中、後夜都不出者，三越比尼罪。
If one does not go out in the early, middle, or later night, it is a minor offense three times.

初、中、後夜三出者，無罪。
If one goes out in the early, middle, and later night, there is no offense.



減六年者，不滿六夏。
Those who subtract six years, are not yet six summers old.




故敷具者，於六年內畜持。
Therefore, the equipment should be maintained for six years.




若捨、若不捨者，故氈現前若捨更作，犯。
If given up or not given up, when the old mat is present, and one discards it and makes a new one, an offense is committed.

故氈現前不捨作，亦犯，
If the old mat is present and one doesn’t discard it when making a new one, an offense is also committed.

故氈不現前若捨作，亦犯。
If the old mat is not present and one discards it and makes a new one, an offense is committed.

故氈不現前不捨作新敷具，
If the old mat is not present and one doesn’t discard it when making a new mat,

若自作、若使人作，作成皆，尼薩耆波夜提；
whether made by oneself or made by others, completing it incurs a nissaggiya pācittiya offense.

受用，越毘尼罪。
Using it incurs a transgression of the Vinaya.



為好故者，嫌太小、太大、太輕、太重、穿破、太冷、太熱、我有檀越有人作、我有羊毛，當更作新敷具，為好故尼薩耆。
For the sake of goodness, one may complain that it is too small, too large, too light, too heavy, torn, too cold, too hot; since I have a benefactor to make it, and I have wool, I should make a new mat for the sake of goodness.



除僧羯磨者，世尊開故無罪。
Excluding the ecclesiastical act, the World-Honored One declared it to be blameless.




羯磨或成、或不成。
A karma may be completed or not completed.

不成者，若是比丘，身不羸顏色不惡、筋力不減麁食能飽、若白不成就、羯磨不成就、眾不成就，如是比事事不成就，是名羯磨不成就。
If it is not completed, then if a monk is not emaciated, looks healthy, has not lost strength, can be satisfied with coarse food, but fails to complete the recitation, the karma is not completed, the assembly is not completed, and other affairs are not completed. This is called karma not completed.

若是老病比丘，身羸顏色惡、筋力減少細食不能飽，何況麁。
If it is an old and sick monk who is emaciated, looks unhealthy, has reduced strength, and cannot be satisfied with fine food, let alone coarse food.

白不成就、羯磨不成就、眾不成就，如是比事事有失，是亦名羯磨不成就。
If the recitation is not completed, the karma is not completed, the assembly is not completed, and other affairs have mistakes, this is also called karma not completed.

成就者，若是比丘羸瘦顏色惡、筋力減少細食不能飽、白成就、羯磨成就、眾成就，如是比事事無失，是名羯磨成就。
If it is completed, and the monk is emaciated, looks unhealthy, has reduced strength, cannot be satisfied with fine food, but the recitation is completed, the karma is completed, and the assembly is completed, other affairs have no mistakes. This is called karma completed.

是老病比丘僧羯磨已，應當自疏記，先受持故氈年月日數，病差已還受持此故氈，從前滿六年。
If an old and sick monk has completed the sangha karma, he should make a note of it himself, recording the number of years, months, and days he has used the old woolen blanket. Once recovered from illness, he can use this old woolen blanket again, fulfilling the six years from before.

若是比丘病差不還補六年，尼薩耆波夜提。
If a monk recovers from illness and does not replenish the six years, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.



尼薩耆波夜提者，如上說。
As stated above, Nisagi Bhoyati.

眾僧中捨已，僧不應還，僧得受用，但不得儭身，是故說。
Once relinquished to the assembly of monks, it should not be taken back by them, but they may use it, just not for personal gain, thus it is said.




佛住毘舍離大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the Great Forest Monastery in Vaishali and elaborated as above.

世尊以五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見故氈處處在地、若糞掃中、故屋中、屋簷下，烏鳥銜作巢、鼠曳入穴。
The Blessed One, for the benefit of five matters, would visit the monks' quarters every five days and saw old mats everywhere on the ground, in places for sweeping waste, in old houses, under eaves, carried by birds to make nests, or dragged into holes by mice.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「此是何等故氈處處狼藉？」
The Buddha knowingly asked the monks, "What kind of old mats are scattered everywhere like this?"

諸比丘白佛言：「世尊！有諸比丘，或罷道、或死者、或現在，棄捨故氈狼藉。」
The monks said to the Buddha, "Blessed One! Some monks, either disrobed, passed away, or still present, have discarded these old mats carelessly."

佛語諸比丘：「若施者不知籌量，受者應籌量。比丘受施，應當用、不應棄。
The Buddha said to the monks, "If the donors don't know how to measure, the recipients should measure. Monks, upon receiving offerings, should use them and not discard them.

從今日若比丘作新敷具氈、尼師檀，當著故敷具氈辟方一修伽陀搩手，為壞好色故。」
From today, if a monk makes a new sitting mat or nisidana, he should keep an old sitting mat a hand's breadth away to ruin its appearance.

佛告諸比丘：「依止毘舍離比丘皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha instructed the monks, "All the monks residing in Vaishali should gather, and for the sake of ten benefits, a precept is laid down for the monks, and even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘作新敷具氈、尼師檀，當著故敷具氈辟方一修伽陀搩手，為壞好色故。
If a monk makes a new sitting mat or nisidana, he should place an old sitting mat a hand's breadth away to spoil its good appearance.

若比丘作新敷具氈、尼師檀，不著故敷具氈辟方一搩手，尼薩耆波夜提。」
If a monk makes a new sitting mat or nisidana and does not place an old sitting mat a hand's breadth away, it is an offense entailing confession and forfeiture."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




新者，初成。
New, newly formed.




敷具者，氈。
The covering material is felt.




尼師檀者，如佛所聽。
Nisidana, as permitted by the Buddha.




作者，若自作、若使人作。  
The creator, whether creating oneself or having others create.




故敷具者，先六年所持者是。
The distributors of gifts are those who held positions six years prior.




修伽陀者，等正覺。
Those who cultivate the Gathas attain perfect enlightenment.




一搩手者，長二尺四寸。
One span is two feet and four inches long.

取故氈時不得從少聞者、犯戒者、無聞者、住房壞不補治者、惡名人、斷滅見人、遠離和尚阿闍梨不憙諮問者、不能破魔人、不分別魔事者，如是人邊不應取；
When taking an old felt, do not take it from those who have heard little, violated precepts, are ignorant, do not repair broken housing, have a bad reputation, have incorrect views, stay away from preceptors, dislike consulting their mentors, cannot defeat demons, or cannot discern demonic matters.

應從多聞乃至能分別魔事人邊取。
One should take from those who are well-learned and can discern demonic matters.

著修伽陀辟方一搩手取故氈時，不得缺角、麥形、如杵形、車形，垂、亂、舉、下。
When making a patch using one span of the old felt, it should not be missing corners, have a shape like barley, a pestle, or a cart, be drooping, disorganized, raised, or sunken.

缺角者，無角。
Missing corners mean no corners.

麥形者，中央廣兩頭狹。
The shape of barley means wide in the center and narrow at the ends.

杵者，兩頭廣中央狹。
The shape of a pestle means wide at the ends and narrow in the center.

車形者，一頭廣一頭狹。
The shape of a cart means wide at one end and narrow at the other.

垂者，掇著。
Drooping means sagging down.

亂者，不周正。
Disorganized means not regular.

舉者，凸起。
Raised means protruding.

下者，凹四邊，縫處高、中央下，如是不得著。
Sunken means concave on the four sides, with the seams high and the center low; this should not be used.

著時方圓令周正。
When patching, it should be square or round and regular.

若穿壞者補，若垢膩當浣，擗雜餘毛作。
If torn, it should be mended; if dirty, it should be washed; use mixed wool for repair.

是比丘作新尼師檀，若不著故者，
If a monk makes a new nishidana and doesn't use the old one,

是尼師檀應眾僧中捨，僧不應還，僧得受用，不得儭身，是故說。
The old nishidana should be given up in the assembly of monks, not returned to them, and monks may use it but not keep it personally; thus it is said.




大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the great forest monastery in Vaiśālī, widely teaching as mentioned above.

爾時尊者優陀夷擔重羊毛，僂身而行從城裏出，
At that time, the venerable Utthaya was carrying a heavy load of wool, walking out of the city with a bent posture,

為世人所嫌：「看沙門優陀夷，如駱駝、如驢、如客負人，如是負羊毛去。
and was criticized by the people: "Look at Shramana Utthaya, like a camel, like a donkey, like a porter, carrying wool like this.

失沙門法，何道之有？」
He has lost the Shramana principle, what kind of path is this?"

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
The monks, due to this reason, went to inform the World-Honored One,

佛言：「呼優陀夷來。」
The Buddha said: "Call Utthaya here."

來已，佛問優陀夷：「汝實擔重羊毛，為世人所譏耶？」
Having come, the Buddha asked Utthaya: "Did you indeed carry a heavy load of wool and were criticized by the people?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied: "Indeed, World-Honored One!"

佛言：「此是惡事，從今日後不聽擔負。」
The Buddha said: "This is a wrongful act, from today onward you are not permitted to carry loads."



衛城，廣說如上。

Moreover, the Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī and expounded as previously stated.

有諸比丘到北方讚歎佛，讚歎舍利弗、目連、諸長老比丘及須達居士、毘舍佉鹿母、祇桓精舍、開眼林，種種讚歎諸比丘。

There were monks who went north and praised the Buddha, praised Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, various elder monks, as well as lay disciples like Sudatta, Visākhā Migāramāta, and praised the Jetavana Monastery, the Grove of the Open Eye, and various other monks.

聞已，有六十比丘欲來禮拜，即問來比丘：「我欲往彼少供養梵行人，齎何等物當得適彼所須？」

Upon hearing this, sixty monks wished to visit and pay homage, and they asked the visiting monks, “We wish to go there and offer some alms to the ascetics; what should we bring to meet their needs?”

答言：「長老！彼諸比丘一切皆著氈衣，唯除漉水囊及絡囊，可持羊毛往彼。」

They replied, “Elder! Those monks there all wear felt garments, except for water filtering bags and net bags. You may bring wool to them.”

爾時有六十比丘，各各持羊毛重擔而行，從聚落至聚落、從城至城。

At that time, the sixty monks each carried a heavy load of wool and traveled from village to village, from city to city.

時世人譏嫌：「汝等看是沙門釋子持重擔而行，如駝、如驢、如客作人、如商人，如是擔重擔。」

The people of the time mocked, “See these Sramana disciples of the Shakyamuni who carry heavy loads as they walk, just like camels, donkeys, laborers, and merchants, burdened with such heavy loads.”

復有人言：「汝不知耶？此間賤買，欲彼間貴賣。失沙門法，何道之有？」

Another said, “Don’t you know? They buy cheaply here and wish to sell dearly there. They have abandoned the dharma of the Sramana, what path do they have?”

諸比丘漸向舍衛城，到已禮世尊足却住一面。

The monks gradually approached the city of Śrāvastī, and upon arrival, they paid homage at the feet of the World-Honored One and stood to one side.

佛知而故問諸比丘：「汝等從何處來？」

The Buddha, knowing this, asked them, “Where have you come from?”

答言：「世尊！從北方來。」

They replied, “World-Honored One! We come from the north.”

佛問諸比丘：「道路不疲、乞食不難耶？」

The Buddha asked the monks, “Was the journey tiresome, or was obtaining alms difficult?”

答言：「世尊！道路不疲、乞食不苦，但於道中為世人所譏。」

They replied, “World-Honored One! The journey was not tiring, and obtaining alms was not difficult, but along the way, we were criticized by people.”

佛問諸比丘：「世人所譏何等？」

The Buddha asked the monks, “What were the people’s criticisms?”

答言：「世尊！我等六十人皆擔羊毛，如上廣說。」

They replied, “World-Honored One! We, the sixty of us, all carried wool, as broadly explained above.”

佛言：「比丘！汝等正應為世人所嫌，從今日後不聽比丘自擔羊毛。」

The Buddha said, “Monks, you rightfully deserve the criticism of the people; from this day forward, monks are not permitted to carry wool themselves.”

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者盡集，以十利故為諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」

The Buddha told the monks, “All who reside in Śrāvastī should gather; for the sake of ten benefits, a rule is established for the monks, and those who have already heard should hear it again.”

若比丘行道中得羊毛欲取，是比丘得自手取至三由延。

If a monk obtains wool while on the road and wishes to take it, he may do so by hand for up to three yojanas.

若過三由延擔者，尼薩耆波夜提。

If a monk carries it beyond three yojanas, it is an offense entailing expiation with forfeiture


比丘者，
Bhikshu,

若一人、
whether one person,

若眾多、
or many,

若僧。
or the Sangha.




行道者

Travelers

三由延

Three yojanas

二由延

Two yojanas

一由延

One yojana

半由延

Half a yojana

一拘盧舍

One krośa




得者，若男、若女、若大、若小、若在家、若出家人邊得。
One who has attained it, whether male or female, whether old or young, whether from a household or from a renunciant.




羊毛者，十種，如上說。

Wool comes in ten varieties, as mentioned above.




欲取者，實所須。
If you wish to take, truly consider your needs.




自擔三由延者，五肘弓、二千弓名一拘盧舍；
By measuring three yojanas oneself, five elbow-bows, and two thousand bows make one krosha;

四千弓半由延；
Four thousand bows make half a yojana;

八千弓一由延；
Eight thousand bows make one yojana;

十六千弓二由延；
Sixteen thousand bows make two yojanas;

二十四千弓為三由延。
Twenty-four thousand bows make three yojanas.

三由延者，自擔齊三由延，若過，尼薩耆波夜提。
For three yojanas, measuring up to three yojanas oneself, if exceeded, a Nisagghiya pācittiya offense is committed.




尼薩耆波夜提者，是毛應眾僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nissaggiya Pācittiya is an offense that should be relinquished among the monks, requiring confession and expiation.

若不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If one does not relinquish and confess, it becomes a transgression beyond the Pācittiya offense.




若比丘持羊毛，著道行至一由延，有所忘還取，取已還至本處，即滿三由延不得復過。
If a monk carries wool and goes one yojana along the road, forgets something and returns to retrieve it, then returns to the original place, he will have traveled three yojanas and should not go further.

過者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If he goes further, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若一由延半忘物，得還，還已不得復去。
If he forgets something after one and a half yojanas, he may return, but once returned, he should not go further.

去者，尼薩耆波夜提。
If he goes further, it is a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若直行齊三由延，過一脚越比尼罪，過兩脚，尼薩耆波夜提。
If he goes straight for three yojanas, taking one step further incurs a pārājika offense, two steps further incurs a nissaggiya pacittiya offense.

若二人各有擔，齊三由延已，轉易各復得三由延，三人九由延，四人十二由延。
If two people each carry a load and travel three yojanas, by exchanging loads they can go another three yojanas. For three people, it's nine yojanas; for four people, twelve yojanas.

若如是眾多人，隨人為限，唯不得更重檐。
If there are many people like this, each should adhere to their own limit, and must not exceed it by trading loads repeatedly.

曾檐者，若貿易、若更得，得更至三由延。
If trading or exchanging occurs, they may travel up to another three yojanas.

若比丘持羊毛著衣囊中，從一家至一家，計滿三由延不得復去。
If a monk carries wool in his clothing bag and travels from house to house, once it adds up to three yojanas, he should not go further.

若持羊毛著鉢囊中，乞食從一聚落至一聚落，亦如是。
If he carries wool in his bowl bag and begs for food from settlement to settlement, it is the same.

若持羊毛著囊中經行，亦如是。
If he carries wool in his bag while walking back and forth, it is the same.

若持繞塔，亦如是。
If he carries it while circumambulating a stupa, it is the same.

若未成作物，乃至齊塞針筒毛，亦犯。
If unfinished goods are carried, even just enough to block a needle tube, it's an offense.

若已成物，若作氈、若枕、若褥等，不犯。
If it is already made into products like felt, cushions, or mattresses, there is no offense.

若檐駱駝毛、犎毛，得偷蘭遮罪。
If camel hair or yak hair is carried beyond the limit, it incurs a thullaccaya offense.

若擔𭷯牛尾，越比尼罪。
If an ox tail is carried beyond the limit, it is a pārājika offense.

若施柄，無罪。
If a handle is provided, there is no offense.

若擔師子毛、猪毛，越比尼心悔。
If lion's hair or boar's hair is carried, it leads to regret of pārājika.

若成器，無罪。
If formed into implements, there is no offense.

是故說。
Thus it was said.



大林重閣精舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the Great Forest Mansion in Vishali, teaching broadly as above.

時尊者優陀夷是善生比丘尼本二，時尊者優陀夷持羊毛與善生比丘尼作是言：「善哉姊妹！與我浣染擗治。」
At that time, Venerable Udayi, who was the origin of Bhikkhuni Sudharma, took some wool and said to Bhikkhuni Sudharma, "Good sister! Wash, dye and prepare it for me!"

比丘尼即持去至自住處，與浣染擗竟盛著箱中，以腋下麁毛、屏處麁毛覆上，即遣使持與優陀夷。
The bhikkhuni took it to her abode, washed, dyed, and prepared it, then placed it in a box, covered it with coarse wool from the armpits and private parts, and sent someone to deliver it to Udayi.

優陀夷得已，開箱見是麁毛，歡喜示諸比丘言：「看此長老非親里比丘尼，與少毛得多毛來。」
After receiving it, Udayi opened the box, saw the coarse wool, and joyfully showed it to the other monks, saying, "Look, this elder bhikkhuni who is not my relative gave more wool in exchange for less."

時諸比丘見已語言：「此是覆藏之物，云何出示人？」
Upon seeing this, the monks said, "This is a concealed item, how can it be shown to others?"

即答言：「此有何覆藏物？我與少毛得多毛來。」
He replied, "What hidden thing is there? I gave less wool and got more in return."

時六群比丘遙聞已，拍手大笑：「怪哉！怪哉！」
Hearing this from afar, the group of six monks clapped and laughed, "How strange! How strange!"

諸比丘聞已往白世尊。
When the monks heard of this, they reported it to the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼優陀夷來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Udayi here."

來已，佛問優陀夷：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha asked Udayi, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
He replied, "Indeed, it is true."

佛言：「此是惡事。」
The Buddha said, "This is a wrongful act."

乃至佛問比丘：「設使親里比丘尼，應藏之物當出示親里比丘不？」
The Buddha then asked the monks, "If a relative bhikkhuni possessed a concealed item, could it be shown to a relative monk?"

答言：「不也。世尊！」
The monks replied, "No, Blessed One!"

「設使親里比丘，得親里比丘尼應藏之物，當出示人不？」
"If a relative monk obtained a concealed item from a relative bhikkhuni, could it be shown to others?"

「不也。世尊！」
"No, Blessed One!"

佛語諸比丘：「從今日不得使非親里比丘尼浣染擗羊毛。」
The Buddha said to the monks, "From today, do not have non-relative bhikkhunis wash, dye, and prepare wool." 




卫城，广说如上。  
Furthermore, the Buddha stayed in Śrāvastī and elaborated as above.

时尊者优陀夷持羊毛与大爱道比丘尼：「善哉姊妹！与我浣染擗治。」  
At that time, the Venerable Udāyin carried wool and said to the Bhikkhuni Mahāprajāpatī, "Good sister! Please wash, dye, and card it for me."

时大爱道比丘尼即为擗染治讫，还送与优陀夷已，往至世尊所，头面礼足却住一面。  
The Bhikkhuni Mahāprajāpatī then washed, dyed, and carded it, returned it to Udāyin, and went to the World-Honored One, where she respectfully bowed and stood to one side.

佛知而故问：「手上何以故有染色？」  
The Buddha, knowing, asked on purpose, "Why does your hand have dye on it?"

答言：「我与尊者优陀夷浣染擗羊毛。」  
She replied, "I washed, dyed, and carded wool for the Venerable Udāyin."

佛语诸比丘：「云何优陀夷使非亲里比丘尼浣染擗羊毛？」  
The Buddha said to the monks, "How is it that Udāyin had a non-relative Bhikkhuni wash, dye, and card wool?"

佛言：「呼优陀夷来。」  
The Buddha said, "Call Udāyin here." 

来已，佛问优陀夷：「汝实使大爱道比丘尼浣染擗羊毛耶？」  
When he came, the Buddha asked Udāyin, "Did you indeed have the Bhikkhuni Mahāprajāpatī wash, dye, and card the wool?"

答言：「实尔。世尊！」  
He replied, "Indeed, World-Honored One!"

佛言：「优陀夷！汝云何令行道比丘尼作？从今日后不听使非亲里比丘尼浣染擗羊毛。」  
The Buddha said, "Udāyin! How could you have a practicing Bhikkhuni do this? From today on, it is not allowed to have non-relative Bhikkhunis wash, dye, and card wool."

佛告诸比丘：「依止舍卫城者皆悉令集，以十利故为诸比丘制戒，乃至已闻者当重闻。  
The Buddha told the monks, "All those staying in Śrāvastī should gather, and for ten benefits I will establish a rule for the monks, even those who have heard it, must hear it again.

若比丘使非亲里比丘尼浣染擗羊毛，尼萨耆波夜提。  
If a monk has a non-relative Bhikkhuni wash, dye, and card wool, it is a Pācittiya offense."



比丘、非親里及羊毛，如上說。
Bhikkhus, neither family nor wool, as said above.



浣染，如上第五戒中說。
Washing, as stated in the Fifth Precept above.




擗者分析。

Analysis by the analyst.




尼薩耆波夜提者，此毛應眾僧中捨，波夜提罪應悔過。
Nisagika pachittiya: This hair should be relinquished in the presence of the assembly of monks, and the pachittiya offense should be confessed.

不捨而悔，越比尼罪。
If not relinquished and only confessed, it is a transgression against the Vinaya rules.

波夜提者，如上說。
As for the pachittiya, it is as explained above.




此中增擗一事，除打著泥污衣，著垢膩衣往尼寺，餘如上第五戒中廣說。
There is an additional rule here, except for wearing muddy clothes, and wearing greasy clothes to the nunnery, the rest are explained in detail in the fifth precept above.




摩訶僧祇律卷第九
The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, Scroll Nine




