orry, it seems like you've provided a template or directive without any specific text to translate. Could you please provide the lines you'd like translated


【經文資訊】

[Scripture Information]

大正新脩大藏經

Taishō Revised Tripitaka

第 22 冊

Volume 22

No. 1425

Number 1425

摩訶僧祇律

Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya




【版本記錄】發行日期：2024-08，最後更新：2024-07-12

[Version History] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




【編輯說明】本資料庫由

[Editing Instructions] This database is provided by

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）

the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA)

依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯

and is edited in accordance with the "Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō."




【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供

[Original Data] Provided by Elder Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by the Gayasan Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain Elder in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Provided by Master Shi Benchan with new punctuation




其他事項

Other Matters

本資料庫可自由免費流通

This database can be freely distributed at no cost

詳細內容請參閱

For detailed information, please refer to

財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告

The Copyright Declaration of the Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database




orry, it seems that there was no text provided to translate. Could you please provide the lines that you want to be translated


摩訶僧祇律卷第十四東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯  
The Mahāsāṅghika Vinaya, Volume Fourteen, translated by the Tripiṭaka Master Buddhavadhra and Faxian from the Eastern Jin Dynasty in India 




明單提九十二事法之三  
Explaining the third of the ninety-two rules of clarity




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and expounded as above.

爾時有居士，請眾多知識比丘，是諸比丘中有一長老比丘，行摩那埵在下行坐。
At that time, a householder invited many learned monks, among whom was an elder monk, who sat in the row below, practicing discipline.

檀越優婆夷見已問言：「尊者坐處先在上，今何故乃坐此中耶？」
The female lay supporter saw and asked, "Venerable sir, your seat was initially higher, why are you now sitting here?"

答言：「得坐處便坐，何須問也？」
He replied, "I sit wherever there is a seat, why do you ask?"

優婆夷言：「我知尊者坐處，正應在此。我亦悉知諸尊者坐處。」
The laywoman said, "I know the seat of the venerable should rightfully be here. I also know the seats of all the venerable ones."

時難陀語優婆夷言：「汝何故為呼汝阿闍梨在上座坐？汝阿闍梨小兒時戲猶故未除。」
Then Nanda said to the laywoman, "Why do you call your teacher to sit in the higher seat? Even as a child, your teacher still plays."

優婆夷聞已心不歡喜，作是念：「我阿闍梨故當犯小小戒故在此下坐。」
The laywoman, upon hearing this, was not pleased and thought, "My teacher sat here because he had committed a minor offense."

即捉飯筐飲食擲地而去，作是言：「尊者自於此中取食。」
She then grabbed the food basket, threw it on the ground, and left, saying, "Venerable sir, take the food yourself from here."

作是語已入房裏掩戶一扇，而說偈言：
Having said this, she entered the room, closed the door, and uttered a verse:



出家已经久，  
It has been a long time since I renounced the world,

修习于梵行；  
Practicing the holy life;




童子戲不止，  
The child plays without stopping,  

云何受信施？  
How can he receive and trust a gift?  




諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼難陀來。」
The monks went to report this matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call Nanda here."

來已，佛問難陀：「汝實爾不？」
Having arrived, the Buddha asked Nanda, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
Nanda replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛語難陀：「此是惡事。
The Buddha said to Nanda, "This is a bad deed.

梵行人中間放逸已還作如法，云何嗤弄向未受具戒人說其麁罪？
How could you behave loosely amongst the celibate practitioners and then ridicule and speak of the grave offenses to those not yet fully ordained?

從今日後不聽向未受具戒人說他麁罪。」
From today onwards, you are not allowed to talk about others' grave offenses to those not fully ordained."



復次佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Furthermore, the Buddha resided in Śrāvastī and broadly taught as above.

時有乞食比丘，時到著入聚落衣持鉢入城。
At that time, there was a mendicant monk who, when the time came, donned his robe and took his alms bowl into the city.

次行乞食到一家舍，時男子即語女人言：「汝施出家人食。」
He proceeded to beg for alms and reached a house, where a man immediately said to the woman, "You should give food to the renunciant."

女人問言：「何道出家？」
The woman asked, "Which doctrine has he renounced?"

答言：「釋種出家。」
He replied, "He is a Śākya renunciant."

女人言：「我不與食。」
The woman said, "I will not give food."

問言：「何故不與？」
He asked, "Why not?"

答言：「此非梵行人，是故不與。」
She replied, "He is not a true ascetic; therefore, I will not give."

比丘語女人言：「姊妹！我是梵行人。」
The monk said to the woman, "Sister, I am a true ascetic."

女人言：「尊者迦盧比丘，大名德人猶尚不能修梵行。汝今云何自言我是梵行人？」
The woman said, "The Honorable Kāluṇa Bhikkhu, who is a well-known virtuous person, even he cannot practice asceticism. How can you claim to be a true ascetic?"

比丘聞是惡語心懷愁惱，更不乞食即還精舍一日斷食。
The monk, hearing these harsh words, was troubled in heart and ceased begging for food. He returned to the monastery and fasted for one day.

斷食故四大羸弱，往世尊所頭面禮足却住一面。
Due to fasting, his body became weak, and he went to the World-Honored One, respectfully saluted by touching his head to the feet, and stood to one side.

佛知而故問：「汝今何故四大羸弱？」
The Buddha, knowing his condition, asked, "Why are your four elements weakened now?"

以上因緣具白世尊。
The monk fully explained the cause to the World-Honored One.

佛言：「比丘汝何不語彼：『縱令迦盧比丘非是梵行，何妨我修梵行？』」
The Buddha said, "Monk, why didn't you say to her, 'Even if Kāluṇa Bhikkhu is not a true ascetic, what harm is there in my practicing asceticism?'"

答言：「世尊！我能向彼說，但世尊制戒，不得向未受具戒人說他麁罪，是故不說。」
The monk answered, "World-Honored One, I could have said this to her, but according to the precepts set by you, we are not allowed to discuss the offenses of others with those who have not received full ordination, which is why I did not speak."

佛言：「善哉，善哉！善男子乃能不為命故違佛教戒。」
The Buddha said, "Good! Good! It is commendable that the virtuous person did not violate the Buddha's precepts even for the sake of life."

佛告諸比丘：「是迦盧比丘！在家出家人皆知非梵行，僧應與作非梵行羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "This Kāluṇa Bhikkhu, both householders and renunciants know him not to be a true ascetic. The Sangha should make a formal act of disapproval."

作法者應作是說：「大德僧聽！是迦盧比丘，在家出家人悉知非是梵行。若僧時到僧忍聽，說迦盧比丘非梵行。白如是。」
The procedure should be as follows: "Esteemed monks, let it be known that Kāluṇa Bhikkhu, both householders and renunciants know him not to be a true ascetic. If the time is right and the Sangha agrees, it is stated that Kāluṇa Bhikkhu is not a true ascetic. Thus is it declared."

如是白三羯磨。
Thus, declare it three times according to the formal procedure.

佛問諸比丘：「已與迦盧比丘作說非梵行羯磨未？」
The Buddha asked the monks, "Has the formal act of disapproval been carried out against Kāluṇa Bhikkhu?"

答言：「已作。」
They answered, "It has been done."



佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。

The Buddha told the monks: "Gather all those who depend on the city of Shravasti, and establish rules for the monks for ten benefits, so that even those who have already heard them must hear them again.

若比丘知他比丘麁罪，向未受具戒人說，除僧羯磨，波夜提。

If a monk knows of another monk's serious offense and tells someone who has not received full ordination, except through a Sangha Kamma, it is a Payatti offense.



比丘者，如上說。
The monk, as mentioned above.




知者，若自知、若從他聞。
One who knows, may know from oneself or from hearing others.




粗罪者，四事、十三事。  
Crimes of misconduct, four matters, thirteen matters.




未受具足者，除比丘、比丘尼，雖比丘尼受具足亦不得向說。
Those who have not received full ordination, except monks and nuns, even if nuns have received full ordination, are not allowed to speak.




說者，語前人令知，除僧羯磨。
The speaker tells the people beforehand, allowing them to understand, except for the monastic karma.




羯磨者，若白不成就、眾不成就、羯磨不成就，是不名羯磨。
In the matter of karma, if the preliminary declaration is not completed, the assembly is not completed, or the act itself is not completed, it is not called karma.

若白成就、眾成就、羯磨成就，是名羯磨。
If the preliminary declaration is completed, the assembly is completed, and the act itself is completed, it is called karma.

世尊說無罪。
The Blessed One says there is no fault.




波夜提者，如上說。
Boya Tizhe, as mentioned above.




麁罪，僧未作羯磨者，不得說彼麁罪。
If a monk knows another's grave offense and the Sangha has not performed the formal meeting, he should not speak of the other's grave offense.

若有人問：「某甲比丘犯婬飲酒。」者，應答言：「彼自當知。」
If someone asks, "Did such and such monk commit lust or drink alcohol?", you should answer, "He will know himself."

若僧已作羯磨者，不得循巷唱說。
If the Sangha has performed the formal meeting, one should not go around the streets proclaiming it.

若有問言：「彼比丘犯婬飲酒。」者，比丘應問彼言：「汝何處聞？」
If someone asks, "Did that monk commit lust or drink alcohol?", the monk should ask him, "Where did you hear that?"

答言：「我某處聞。」比丘應答言：「我亦如是處聞。」
If they answer, "I heard it at such and such a place," the monk should respond, "I also heard it there."

若比丘向未受具戒人說比丘四事、十三事，得波夜提。
If a monk tells someone not fully ordained about the monk's four offenses or thirteen rules, he incurs a Pācittiya offense.

說三十尼薩耆、九十二波夜提，越毘尼罪。
To speak of the thirty Nissaggiya or ninety-two Pācittiya incurs a breach of Vinaya.

說四波羅提提舍尼法、眾學威儀，越毘尼心悔。
Telling the four Pārājika or monastic etiquette causes a feeling of remorse over the breach of Vinaya.

說比丘尼八波羅夷、十九僧殘，得偷蘭罪。
To speak of the Bhikkhuni's eight Parajika or nineteen Sanghadisesa results in a Sthulatyaya offense.

三十尼薩耆、百四十一，波夜提。
The thirty Nissaggiya and one hundred forty-one Pācittiya.

八波羅提提舍尼、眾學威儀，得越毘尼心悔。
The eight Pārājika and monastic etiquette result in a feeling of remorse over breaching the Vinaya.

說沙彌、沙彌尼十戒，得越毘尼罪。
Speaking about the Sāmanera and Sāmaneri's ten precepts incurs a breach of Vinaya.

下至俗人五戒，得越毘尼心悔。
Even discussing the layperson's five precepts brings remorse over the Vinaya breach.

是故說。
Thus it is said


佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Śrāvastī and gave extensive teachings as above.

爾時尊者陀驃摩羅子，僧羯磨典知九事，如十三事中廣說。
At that time, the Venerable Dharmarājaputra, who was the master of the nine things in the formal procedures of the monks, explained them as elaborated in the thirteen matters.

爾時有舍那糞掃衣不可分，是陀驃白僧作是言：「是舍那糞掃衣不可分，可與長老摩訶迦葉不？」
At that time, there was a piece of discarded cloth that was indivisible, and Venerable Dharmarājaputra asked the assembly of monks, "This piece of discarded cloth is indivisible, may it be given to Elder Mahākāśyapa?"

諸比丘咸言：「可與。」
All the monks agreed, saying, "It may be given."

是陀驃恐後有諍言故，即更於僧中唱言：「是糞掃舍那衣與長老摩訶迦葉。」
Fearing there might be disputes later, Venerable Dharmarājaputra again announced in the assembly of monks, "This piece of discarded cloth is given to Elder Mahākāśyapa."

如是三唱。
He made this announcement three times.

唱已六群比丘從坐起作是言：「阿誰言與？六群比丘為與不？
After the announcement, the group of six monks stood up and asked, "Who said to give it? Is it to be given from the group of six monks or not?"

汝作是唱非平等心，汝私相親愛故，迴僧物與諸比丘。」
You made this announcement with an unequal mind, out of personal affection, diverting the community’s property to certain monks."

以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」
Thus, they reported this matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call the group of six monks."

來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
After they came, the Buddha asked the group of six monks, "Is it true as stated?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They replied, "It is true, Blessed One!"

佛語比丘：「此是惡事。
The Buddha said to the monks, "This is a wrongful act.

如是梵行人，須汝皮肉血髓猶尚當與，況是糞掃衣不可分，僧中唱與而復還遮。
As practitioners of the holy life, you should even give your skin, flesh, blood, and marrow, let alone prevent the gift of indivisible discarded cloth which was announced and then withdrawn.

汝先默然與時似貴人相，今還更遮似賤人相。
You initially agreed silently like noble beings, but now withdrawing it you behave like ignoble beings.

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not in accordance with the Dharma, not in accordance with the Vinaya, and not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings. It cannot be used to nurture good conduct."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Gather all those dwelling in Śrāvastī. For ten benefits, I will establish a precept for the monks; even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘僧應分物，先和合聽與，後還遮者，波夜提。」
If a monk agrees to distribute property within the community and then later withdraws it, it is an offense requiring confession.”



比丘者，如上說。
A monk, as described above.




僧者，八種，如上說。
There are eight types of monks, as mentioned above.




物者，八種：時藥乃至淨不淨。
There are eight types of things: from timely medicine to purity and impurity.




先聽者，先僧中分物共和合與。
Those who listen first will share the items with those in the community first.




後遮者，作如是言：「長老隨親厚以僧物與」，波夜提。
The one who comes after prevents by saying, "The elder follows personal affection by giving community property," and commits a transgression.




波夜提者，如上說。  
The one called Boyeti, as mentioned above.




，僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、尼師壇、覆瘡衣、雨浴衣、腰帶、編繩鉢、小鉢、銅盂、扇傘蓋、盛油革囊、刀子、革屣、澡瓶，如是等一切應分物來，當次應取。
When monks distribute items such as the monk's robe, upper robe, inner robe, sitting mat, ulcer cover, rain bath robe, belt, woven rope bowl, small bowl, copper pot, fan umbrella cover, oil-storing leather pouch, knife, leather shoe, washing bottle, all such items that should be distributed, each should take their turn.

若意不欲取者，聽過不取。
If one does not wish to take anything, they may pass up their turn.

若人問言：「汝何以不取？」
If someone asks, "Why do you not take anything?"

應答言：「此非我所須，欲取餘物。」
One should answer, "I do not need this, I want other items."

後來須者應取，無罪。
Those who need it later may take without guilt.

若行物者唱言：「隨意自恣取。」
If the distributor announces, "Take as you wish without restraint,"

比丘爾時隨所須者得自恣取，無罪。
Monks may take what they need without restraint and without guilt at that time.

遮者有三種：或與已遮、與時遮、未與遮。
There are three types of restrictions: already given restriction, time-restricted, and not yet given restriction.

與已遮者，得波夜提。
If already given, it results in a minor offense.

與時遮，得越毘尼。
If time-restricted, it results in a transgression of the discipline.

未與時遮者，得越毘尼心悔。
If not yet given restriction, it results in a transgression with mental regret.

是故說。
Thus it is said


，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed at Shravasti and explained as above.

爾時六群比丘半月誦《波羅提木叉經》時，誦四事時默然，十三事時瞋，三十事時便語，九十二事時便起作如是言：
At that time, when the six groups of monks recited the "Patimokkha Sutra" every half month, they remained silent for four items, became angry for thirteen items, talked during thirty items, and upon ninety-two items they stood up and spoke thus:

「諸長老誰能持是戒？用誦是為？諸天當能持此戒，不使諸比丘生疑悔。」
“Which elder can uphold these precepts? Why recite it? The gods should uphold these precepts, preventing monks from generating doubt and regret.”

爾時誦波羅提木叉者慚愧。
At that time, the reciters of the Patimokkha felt ashamed.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：
The monks, because of this matter, went to inform the World-Honored One, and the Buddha said:

「呼六群比丘來。」來已，佛問六群比丘：「汝實爾不？」
“Summon the six groups of monks.” Once they had arrived, the Buddha asked them, “Is it true?”

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
They replied, “It is true, World-Honored One!”

佛言：「此是惡事。如來欲饒益故，為諸弟子制半月說波羅提木叉。汝云何於中輕呵遮說？」
The Buddha said, “This is a wrong action. The Tathāgata, out of a desire to benefit, established the fortnightly recitation of the Patimokkha for the disciples. How can you lightly scorn it?”

佛語比丘：「此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
The Buddha spoke to the monks, "This is not Dharma, not the discipline, not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings, and it cannot nurture good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All who reside at Shravasti should gather; for the sake of ten benefits, I establish the precepts for the monks, even those who have heard it should hear it again.

若比丘半月誦波羅提木叉經時，作如是言：『長老用半月誦雜碎戒為？使諸比丘生疑悔。』作如是輕呵戒者，波夜提。」
If a monk says during the half-monthly recitation of the Patimokkha, 'Elders, why recite these trivial precepts every half-month? It causes monks to generate doubt and regret.' Whoever scorns the precepts like this will incur a pācittiya."



比丘者，如上說。
Bhikkhu, as mentioned above.




半月者，若十四日、十五日。
Half a month is about fourteen or fifteen days.




波羅提木叉者，十修多羅也。

Pratimoksha is the ten code of conduct.




說者，和合僧半月半月說。
Speaker, the harmonious monks speak every half month.




杂碎戒者，除四事、十三事，余者是也。
For those with minor infractions, apart from four matters and thirteen matters, the rest are such.

使诸比丘生疑悔者，得波夜提。
Causing monks to have doubts and regrets results in a pācittiya.




波夜提者，如上說。
Prajñaptivādin, as mentioned above.




輕呵有三種：有未說時呵、有說時呵、有說已呵。
There are three types of light scolding: scolding before speaking, scolding while speaking, and scolding after speaking.

未說時呵者，先語如是言：「長老莫為說是雜碎戒，我欲疾疾竟故。」
Scolding before speaking is when one first says: "Elder, do not explain these minor precepts, I want to finish quickly."

是名未說呵。
This is called scolding before speaking.

說時呵者，說戒時作如是言：「長老用說是雜碎戒為？使諸比丘生疑悔。」
Scolding while speaking is when one says during the teaching of precepts: "Elder, why explain these minor precepts? It causes the monks to have doubts and regrets."

是名說時呵。
This is called scolding while speaking.

說已呵者，說已作如是言：「汝向說是雜碎戒，汝何故廣說？使我坐久疲極欲死。」
Scolding after speaking is when one says after the explanation: "You explained these minor precepts, why did you speak at length? It left me sitting fatigued, feeling like I might die."

是名說已呵。
This is called scolding after speaking.

未說時呵，越毘尼罪。
Scolding before speaking violates the Vinaya.

說時呵，波夜提。
Scolding while speaking incurs a Pācittiya offense.

說已呵，越毘尼心悔。
Scolding after speaking is a transgression atoning with remorse.

是故說。
Thus it is spoken.



妄語及種類，
False speech and its types,

兩舌以更舉，
Duplicity and changing topics,



沒有達到潔淨和正式的程度，　　超過人們所說的粗劣的罪行，

No purity and rules are reached,  beyond the crude sins spoken by people, 




親厚輕呵戒，  
Familiarity lightly scolds admonitions,

是初跋渠竟。  
This is how the beginning finally crossed the river.




舍，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in the wilderness monastery and extensively taught as above.

爾時營事比丘，自手斫樹折枝葉、自摘花果，為世人所嫌，作是言：「汝等看是沙門，瞿曇無量方便毀呰殺生、讚歎不殺生，而今自手斫樹採華傷殺物命。」
At that time, the attending monk personally chopped trees, broke branches and leaves, picked flowers and fruits, and was criticized by the people, saying: "Look at this monk, Gautama condemns killing in many ways and praises non-killing, but now he himself chops trees and picks flowers, harming and killing living beings."

失沙門法，何道之有？」諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，
He has lost the way of a monk; what path is there?" Because of this reason, the monks went to inform the Blessed One.

佛言：「呼營事比丘來。」來已，佛問比丘：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。世尊！」
The Buddha said: "Call the attending monk here." Once he came, the Buddha asked the monk, "Is it true?" He answered, "Yes, it is true, Blessed One!"

佛告比丘：「此是惡事。是中雖無命，不應使人生惡心。
The Buddha told the monk: "This is a bad deed. Even though there is no life in it, one should not cause people to have a malicious mind.

汝等亦可少作事業、捨諸緣務。
You should also do less business and give up various mundane affairs.

從今日不聽自手斫斷種子傷破鬼村。」
From today, you are not allowed to personally chop and destroy seeds, harming the spirit village."

佛告諸比丘：「依止曠野住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks: "Those who live in the wilderness should all gather. For ten benefits, a rule is established among the monks, so those who have heard it should hear it again.

若比丘壞種子破鬼村者，波夜提。」
If a monk destroys seeds or harms the spirit village, it is an offense."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as previously stated.




种子者，有五种：

There are five kinds of seeds:

根种、茎种、心种、节种、子种，

Root-seed, stem-seed, heart-seed, node-seed, offspring-seed,

是为五种。

These are the five kinds.




鬼村者，樹木、草。
Ghost villages, trees and grass.




壞者，斫伐毀傷。
Destroying, cutting down, and causing damage.

斫伐毀傷者，波夜提。
For those who cut down and cause damage, it is an offense.




波夜提者，如上說。
Bó yè tí zhě, rú shàng shuō.




根種者，薑根、藕根、芋根、蘿蔔根、葱根，如是等根種用火淨、若刀中析淨，是名根種。
For root seeds, such as ginger root, lotus root, taro root, radish root, green onion root, these root seeds should be purified by fire or cut cleanly with a knife, and are called root seeds.

莖種者，尼拘律祕鉢羅、優曇鉢羅、楊柳，如是比莖種應火淨、若刀中析淨，是名莖種。
Stem seeds, such as Nyagrodha, Vibhitaka, Udumbara, and willow, these stem seeds should be purified by fire or cut cleanly with a knife, and are called stem seeds.

節種者，竹葦、甘蔗，如是等當火淨、若刀中析淨、若甲摘却芽目，是名節種。
For joint seeds, such as bamboo reeds and sugarcane, they should be purified by fire, cut with a knife, or have their buds removed, and are called joint seeds.

心種者，蘿勒、蓼藍，如是比心生者當火淨、若手揉修淨，是名心種。
Heart seeds, such as basil and indigo, these heart-germinating ones should be purified by fire or rubbed clean by hand, and are called heart seeds.

子種者，十七種，穀如第二戒中說，當作火淨、若脫皮淨，是名子種。
Seed seeds, seventeen types, grains as described in the second precept, should be purified by fire or peeled, and are called seed seeds.

裹核種、膚裹種、㲉裹種、𥢶裹種、角裹種、鸚鵡啄、完出、火燒、時種、非時種、水種、陸種，先作更生種。
Wrapped kernel seeds, skin wrapped seeds, husk wrapped seeds, shell wrapped seeds, pod wrapped seeds, parrot-pecked, complete excretion, fire burnt, seasonal seeds, non-seasonal seeds, water seeds, and land seeds, first create regenerating seeds.

裹核種者，呵梨勒、鞞醯勒、阿摩勒、佉殊羅酸棗，如是比應爪甲淨去核而食，若欲合食核者當火淨，是名裹核種。
For wrapped kernel seeds, such as Terminalia, Beleric, Emblic, Myrobalan, and jujube, they should be cleaned of kernels with nails and eaten, if you wish to eat the kernels together, they should be purified by fire, and are called wrapped kernel seeds.

膚裹種者，祕鉢羅破求、優曇鉢羅梨㮈，如是等膚裹種應作火淨，若熟時爛從樹上自落，下時觸木石等傷皮如蚊脚者，即名為淨。
Skin wrapped seeds, such as the Vibhitaka and Udumbara pear fruit, these skin wrapped seeds should be purified by fire, if they ripen and fall naturally from the tree and contact with objects causes their skin to bruise like mosquito bites, they are considered clean.

不得合食子，若欲食者當火淨，是名膚裹種。
They should not be eaten with seeds together, if you wish to eat them, they should be purified by fire, and are called skin wrapped seeds.

㲉裹種者，椰子、胡桃、石榴，如是等㲉裹種者當作火淨。
Husk wrapped seeds, such as coconuts, walnuts, and pomegranates, these husk wrapped seeds should be purified by fire.

若破，是名㲉裹種。
If broken, they are called husk wrapped seeds.

𥢶裹種者，香菜、蘇荏，如是等若未有子手揉修淨，若有子火淨，是名𥢶裹種。
Shell wrapped seeds, such as coriander and perilla, if they have no seeds, they should be rubbed clean by hand, if they have seeds, they should be purified by fire, and are called shell wrapped seeds.

角裹種者，大小豆、摩沙豆，如是等若未成子手揉修淨，若子成火淨，是名角裹種。
Pod wrapped seeds, such as lentils, soybeans, and peas, if they are not yet seeds, they should be rubbed clean by hand, if they are seeds, they should be purified by fire, and are called pod wrapped seeds.

鸚鵡啄者，若鳥啄破落地傷如蚊脚，即名為淨，去核得食，若欲食子者當火淨，是名鸚鵡淨。
Parrot-pecked seeds, if pecked by birds and fall to the ground with bruises resembling mosquito bites, they are considered clean, kernels should be removed before eating, if you wish to eat seeds, they should be purified by fire, and are called parrot-cleaned seeds.

完出者，噉食已從糞中出，如牛馬獼猴糞中出者，是名完出，即名為淨。
Complete excretions, if found in feces after being eaten, such as those from cattle, horses, and monkeys, are called complete excretions, and are considered clean.

火燒者，若樹果為野火所燒落地，即名為淨，是名火燒淨。
Fire burnt seeds, if seeds or fruits are burnt by wildfire and fall to the ground, they are called fire burnt clean seeds.

時種者，穀時種穀、麥時種麥，此種當用火淨。
Seasonal seeds, grains planted in season, wheat planted in season, these seeds should be purified by fire.

若脫皮淨，如拘驎提國土作穀聚，畏非人偷，以灰火遶上作識，此即為淨。
If peeled clean, like grain piles made in Kurindi country, afraid of being stolen by non-humans, surrounded and marked with ash fire, they are considered clean.

如摩摩帝有倉穀未淨，畏年少比丘不知法，使淨人火淨，至倉穀盡。
Like in the case of Ma-Ma-De country having uncleaned grain stores, afraid young monks do not know the rules, ordered people to purify by fire until the grains were exhausted.

比丘恒得語言：「舂去不犯罪。」是名時種。
Monks often say, "Grinding does not constitute an offense," and these are called seasonal seeds.

非時種者，穀至麥時、麥至穀時，應火淨、若剝皮淨，是名非時種。
Non-seasonal seeds, grains that extend to wheat time and wheat that extends to grain time, should be purified by fire or peeled, and are called non-seasonal seeds.

水種者，優鉢羅花、拘物頭花、香亭花，如是等根當火淨、若刀中劈，是名水種。
Water seeds, such as lotus flowers, jasmine flowers, and fragrant temple flowers, their roots should be purified by fire or split with a knife, and are called water seeds.

先作後生者，有粳米、若蘿蔔根，當火淨刀中劈，是名先作後生。
Already made and then grown ones, such as polished rice and radish roots, should be purified by fire or split with a knife, and are called already made and then grown seeds.

陸種者，十七種穀，當脫皮淨若火淨，是名陸種。
Land seeds, seventeen types of grains, should be peeled or purified by fire, and are called land seeds.



若自截、若使人截、自破使人破、自碎使人碎、自燒使人燒、自剝皮使人剝皮。
If you cut yourself, or make others cut, if you break yourself, or make others break, if you crush yourself, or make others crush, if you burn yourself, or make others burn, if you peel yourself, or make others peel.

自截者，若自方便截五種生竟日不止，得一波夜提。
For self-cutting, if you conveniently cut the five kinds throughout the day without stopping, you commit a Pārājika offense.

若中間息已更截，隨息一一波夜提。
If you stop in between and then cut again, for each pause, you commit a Pārājika offense.

使人截者，一方便語使人一日截，得一波夜提。
If you make others cut through simple words and they cut all day, you commit a Pārājika offense.

若中間語言疾疾截，隨一一語波夜提。
If in between you urge them to cut quickly with your words, for each word, you commit a Pārājika offense.

如是一切破碎燒剝皮四事，自作、若使人作，亦如是。
For all such actions of breaking, crushing, burning, and peeling, whether done by oneself or done by others, it is the same.

若為僧作知事人，一切不得語淨人言：「截是、破是、碎是、燒是、剝是。」
If someone is serving as an official for the Sangha, they may not tell a layman, "Cut this, break this, crush this, burn this, peel this."

若爾者有罪。皆應言：「知是、淨是。」無罪。
If so, there is an offense. They should say, "Know this, it's clean." Then there is no offense.

以五種生擲池水中，若井中、若大小便中、糞掃中，得越毘尼罪。
Throwing the five kinds into a pond, well, urination or defecation, or refuse heap incurs a Vinaya-breaking offense.

若種爛壞者，得波夜提罪。
If planted seeds are ruined, it incurs a Pārājika offense.

若比丘欲使草不生故，在中經行，行時得越毘尼罪。
If a monk wishes to prevent grass from growing and walks in it, they incur a Vinaya-breaking offense.

若傷草如蚊脚許，得波夜提。
If the grass is damaged as much as a mosquito's leg, one incurs a Pārājika offense.

如是立坐臥亦如是。
The same applies to standing, sitting, and lying down.

若以錐畫樹傷如蚊脚，得波夜提。
If a tree is pricked with a cone, damaging it as much as a mosquito's leg, one incurs a Pārājika offense.

若石上生衣，比丘欲浣衣者不得自除却，應使淨人知然後浣衣。
If clothes grow mold on a stone, a monk wishing to wash clothes should not remove it themselves; they should inform a layman and then wash.

若日炙乾燥得自剝却，無罪。
If dried by sunlight, one may peel it by themselves without offense.

若雨後材木著地，比丘不得自舉，舉者得越毘尼罪。
After rain, if timber is on the ground, a monk should not lift it themselves; doing so incurs a Vinaya-breaking offense.

若傷草如蚊脚許，得波夜提。
If the grass is damaged as much as a mosquito's leg, one incurs a Pārājika offense.

若淨人先舉、比丘後佐，無罪。
If a layperson lifts it first, and the monk assists later, there is no offense.

若比丘僧伽梨、欝多羅僧、安陀會、尼師壇、枕褥、革屣、衣上生湄，使淨人知，著日中暴已得自揉修去。
If a monk's outer garment, upper robe, underclothes, mat, mattress, shoes, or cloth grows mold, they should inform a layperson, and after sun-drying, they may rub and repair themselves.

若餅上生湄，當使淨人知已然後得食。
If mold grows on bread, they should inform a layperson first before eating.



若僧中行豆、胡麻、果蓏、甘蔗如是等，上座應問：「作淨未？」
If a monk is dealing with beans, sesame, fruits, or sugarcane, the elder should ask: "Have you purified these?"

若言：「未作。」應使作淨。
If they say, "Not yet," they should be made to purify them.

若言：「已作。」應食。
If they say, "It's done," then it can be eaten.

若在一器中有眾多果，若一果處作淨，餘者亦通得為淨。
If there are many fruits in one container, purifying one fruit purifies the rest.

若在異器者，當別一一器作淨。
If they are in different containers, each container should be purified separately.

若甘蔗著葉者，當莖莖別作淨。
If sugarcane has leaves, each stalk should be purified individually.

若無葉者得合束，如果得總作淨。
If there are no leaves, they can be bundled together and purified collectively.

若比丘在阿練若處住，夏安居中草生覆道，畏失道故攬兩草相結，得越毘尼罪。
If a monk stays in a forest and tall grass covers the path during the rainy retreat, and he ties two grass clumps together for fear of losing the path, he incurs a transgression.

若以餘物結作識而去，還已解者無罪。
If he marks the path with another object and returns to untie it, there is no offense.

若比丘在山中住，泥雨滑行欲倒地時，捉草挽斷復更捉，如是比無罪。
If a monk living in the mountains slips in the mud and grabs grass to avoid falling, breaking it and grabbing more, there is no offense.

若為水所漂，若捉草隨斷，斷亦無罪。
If he is swept away by water, and breaks grass while grabbing it, there is no offense.

若泥作時渴欲飲水者，若手有泥得樹葉中飲。
If while working with mud one is thirsty, and has mud on his hands, he can drink using tree leaves.

若無淨人取葉者，得就樹上生葉中飲，但不得挽令斷。
If there is no one clean to fetch leaves, he can drink from the leaves growing on the tree, but should not pluck them.

高不可得者，得搖樹取乾落葉取水飲。
If they are too high to reach, he can shake the tree to get dry fallen leaves to fetch water.



若比丘斷新生青軟葉，波夜提。  
If a monk breaks a newly grown soft green leaf, a pācittiya (offense).  

若斷長足堅強葉，波夜提。  
If one breaks a fully grown firm leaf, a pācittiya (offense).  

若葉已衰黃斷者，越毘尼。  
If one breaks a leaf that has withered and turned yellow, a lesser offense.  

若風吹三種葉落，取用無罪。  
If leaves fall by the wind among the three types, there is no offense in using them.  

若比丘摘生果，波夜提。  
If a monk picks a raw fruit, a pācittiya (offense).  

半熟者，得越毘尼罪。  
If half ripe, there is a lesser offense.  

熟取者，無罪。  
If picked when ripe, there is no offense.  

若比丘道行夜宿時，挽生草枯草想，得越毘尼罪。  
If a monk pulls living grass thinking it is withered grass while traveling or staying overnight, there is a lesser offense.  

乾草生想，得越毘尼罪。  
If one thinks dried grass is living grass, there is a lesser offense.  

生草生想，波夜提。  
If one thinks living grass is living grass, a pācittiya (offense).  

乾草乾想，無罪。  
If one thinks dried grass is dried grass, there is no offense.  

若城若聚落中，有人祠樹枝葉，雖燥皆不得折取。  
In a city or village, if someone offers tree branches or leaves in prayer, even if dried, they must not be broken and taken.  

折者，得越毘尼罪。  
If one breaks them, it is a lesser offense.  

樹木四句亦如上生草中說。  
The four statements about tree wood are as said above regarding living grass.  




若比丘大小行須水者當詣池水，
If a monk needs water for any purpose, he should go to the pond.

水中若有浮萍遍滿水上，
If the water is covered with duckweed,

欲取水用者，不得以手撥開取水用。
and he wants to take the water for use, he should not use his hand to push the duckweed aside to get the water.

當覓牛馬行處若蛇若蝦蟇行處，
He should look for a place where cows or horses have walked, or snakes or frogs have moved.

若無諸行處者捉土塊仰擲，
If there is no such path, he should take a clod of earth and throw it up.

作如是言：「至梵天上去，若塊石下。」
Saying, "Let it reach the realm of Brahma, should the clod come down."

時打水開處，得用無罪。
Then, when there is a break in the water (due to the impact), he can use it without committing an offense.

若翻覆水中浮萍草，得越毘尼罪。
If he overturns the floating duckweed in the water, he commits a minor transgression.

若捉擲岸上，得波夜提。
If he grabs and throws it on the shore, he commits a serious offense.

入水浴時水草著身者，
When bathing in the water, if water plants stick to the body,

當以水澆令下入水，
he should pour water over them to submerge them.

若斷朝菌，得越毘尼罪。
If he breaks a mushroom, it constitutes a minor transgression.

若拾乾牛屎時，合生草者，波夜提罪。
If he picks up dry cow dung where living grass is attached, it is a serious offense.

是故說。
Thus it is said.



佛住拘睒彌，廣說如上。
The Buddha stayed in Kosambi and explained extensively as above.

爾時僧集欲作羯磨事，尊者闡陀不來，僧遣人語闡陀言：「僧集欲作羯磨事，長老來。」
At that time, the monks gathered to perform a legal act, but the Venerable Chanda did not come, and the monks sent someone to tell him, "The monks have gathered to perform a legal act, Elder, please come."

闡陀作是念：「今喚我者正當欲治罰我罪，更無餘事。」
Chanda thought, "They are calling me now because they want to punish me for my offenses, there is no other reason."

復作是思惟：「我今當擾亂阿誰，能使一切僧皆共擾亂不得作羯磨？
He further contemplated, "Who should I disturb now to cause all the monks to be in such disorder that they cannot perform the legal act?

正當擾亂尊者大目揵連可辦此事。然目連有大神力知我不可，或能捉我擲他方世界，此事不可。」
I should disturb the Venerable Maha Moggallana to accomplish this task. However, Moggallana has great supernatural powers and might know my intentions, he could catch me and throw me to another world, this is not feasible."

復更思惟：「若擾亂大迦葉者可辦此事，然大迦葉有大威德，或能於眾中折辱我，此事不可。」
He further contemplated, "If I disturb the Venerable Kassapa, I could accomplish this task, but Kassapa has great dignity and might humiliate me in front of others, this is not viable."

復作是念：「尊者舍利弗心柔軟質直易共語，若擾亂彼者，可使一切僧擾亂不得與我作羯磨。」
He thought again, "The Venerable Sariputta has a soft heart and is straightforward and easy to talk with. If I disturb him, I can cause all the monks to be disturbed so they cannot perform the legal act with me."

闡陀來入僧中已，作如是言：「尊者舍利弗！我欲問義。」
Chanda entered among the monks and said, "Venerable Sariputta! I want to ask about a principle."

舍利弗言：「今為餘事集僧，此非問義時。」
Sariputta said, "The monks have gathered for another matter, this is not the time for questions."

闡陀復語尊者舍利弗言：「如佛正法，無有非時，得現法中善果除煩惱熱，諸賢聖悅可盡不擇。」
Chanda further told Venerable Sariputta, "In the Buddha’s true Dharma, there is no improper time. One can gain good results in the present law, eliminating the heat of afflictions, which all worthy saints find joy in without exception."

時尊者舍利弗言：「聽所問。」
Then Venerable Sariputta said, "Let me hear your question."

闡陀言：「世尊說四念處，何等是四念處？」
Chanda said, "The Blessed One spoke of the four foundations of mindfulness, what are the four foundations of mindfulness?"

時尊者舍利弗為說四念處，闡陀復言：「我不問四念處，我問四正勤。」
Then Venerable Sariputta explained the four foundations of mindfulness. Chanda then said, "I am not asking about the four foundations of mindfulness, I am asking about the four right efforts."

長老但為我說四正勤。」舍利弗言：「汝欲聞四正勤者聽。」
"Elder, just explain the four right efforts to me." Sariputta said, "If you wish to hear about the four right efforts, listen."

即為說四正勤。闡陀復言：「我問四如意足。」
He then explained the four right efforts. Chanda again said, "I am asking about the four bases of supernatural power."

如是五根、五力、七覺分、八聖道分，如四念處反覆三問。
In this way, it went on with the five faculties, five powers, seven factors of enlightenment, and eightfold path, repeatedly asking like the four foundations of mindfulness.

時諸比丘坐久疲乏，各各散出僧不和合，遂不成羯磨。
The monks became tired from sitting for a long time, and each dispersed because of disunity among the monks, and so the legal act could not be completed.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼闡陀來。」
The monks reported this situation to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call Chanda here."

來已，佛問闡陀：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
When he came, the Buddha asked Chanda, "Is this true?" He answered, "It is true."

佛言：「闡陀！此是惡事。我常不為汝無量方便，呵責擾亂語、讚歎隨順語耶？
The Buddha said, "Chanda! This is a bad deed. Have I not always provided you with countless expedient means, reproaching disruptive speech and praising harmonious speech?

汝今云何作擾亂事？此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
How can you now create disturbance? This is against the Dharma, against the Vinaya, not in accordance with the Buddha's teaching, and cannot foster wholesome qualities."

佛告諸比丘：「依止拘睒彌者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "Let all those living in dependence on Kosambi gather together, for the sake of ten benefits I will establish a rule for the monks, even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘異語惱他，波夜提。」
If a monk speaks divisively causing annoyance to others, this incurs a Pārājika (major offense). 




比丘者，如上說。  
A monk, as previously mentioned.




有八事。

There are eight things that disturb others with different words.

何等八？

What are the eight?

一者作羯磨時；

First, when performing the karma;

二者如法論時；

Second, when discussing in accordance with the Dharma;

三者論阿毘曇時；

Third, when discussing the Abhidharma;

四者論毘尼時；

Fourth, when discussing the Vinaya;

五者不異論；

Fifth, not a different discussion;

六者不異人；

Sixth, not a different person;

七者停論；

Seventh, discontinuing the discussion;

八者異語惱他。

Eighth, disturbing others with different words.

作羯磨者，

When performing karma,

比丘和集作折伏羯磨，乃至別住羯磨，是名作羯磨。

bhikkhus gather to perform retribution karma, even up to the separate dwelling karma, this is called performing karma.

如法論者，

When discussing in accordance with the Dharma,

說非常非斷，是名如法論。

it is said to be neither always nor interrupted, this is called discussing in accordance with the Dharma.

阿毘曇者，

Abhidharma refers to,

九部修多羅，是名阿毘曇。

the nine sections of the sutra, this is called Abhidharma.

毘尼者，

Vinaya refers to,

廣略波羅提木叉，是名毘尼。

the extensive and concise Prātimokṣa, this is called Vinaya.

不異論者，

Those who do not differ in discussion,

不得離本所論更論餘事，是名不異論。

should not depart from the original topic to discuss other matters, this is called not differing in discussion.

不異人者，

Those who do not differ in person,

不得離先問人更問餘人，是名不異人。

should not leave the first asked person to ask another, this is called not differing in person.

停論者，

Those who discontinue the discussion,

當說法時語言住後當更論，是名停論。

when speaking Dharma, they pause and then continue later, this is called discontinuing the discussion.

異語惱他者，

Those who disturb others with different words,

如尊者闡陀異語惱他，是名八事。

are like the respected Chanda disturbing others with different words, this is called the eight things.

於中異語惱他者，

Among them, those who disturb others with different words,

波夜提。

are subject to expiation (pācittiya).

離此八事，

Apart from these eight things,

非波夜提。

there is no offense requiring expiation.


言：「從何處來？」
If someone asks a monk, "Where do you come from?"

答言：「過去中來。」
Answer: "I come from the past."

「何處去？」
"Where are you going?"

答言：「向未來中去。」
Answer: "I am going towards the future."

「何處眠？」
"Where do you sleep?"

「八木上眠。」
"On the astamangala tree."

「汝今日何處食？」
"Where do you eat today?"

答言：「五指食。」
Answer: "Eating with five fingers."

如是問，不正答者，越毘尼罪。
If asked in this way and answered wrongly, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

若賊來入寺中問比丘言：「示我僧物。」
If a thief enters the monastery and asks the monk, "Show me the monks' belongings."

比丘爾時不得示珍寶等諸物，復不得妄語，應示房舍床座等。
At that time, the monk should not show treasures and such items nor speak falsely, but should show rooms, beds, etc.

賊若言：「示我塔物。」
If the thief says, "Show me the pagoda items."

亦不得示塔寶物，復不得妄語，應示塔邊供養具諸器物等。
He should not show the pagoda's treasures nor speak falsely, but should show offering utensils by the pagoda.

賊若言：「示我淨厨。」
If the thief says, "Show me the clean kitchen."

比丘不得妄語，復不得示錢物處，應示釜鑊瓫器等。
The monk should not speak falsely nor show the place of money, but should show pots, pans, and utensils.

若屠家畜生走，問比丘：「見不？」
If a butcher's animal runs away and asks a monk, "Did you see?"

比丘不得妄語，復不得示處，應言：「看指押！看指押！」(梵音與不見同)
The monk should not speak falsely nor show the place, but should say, "Look here! Look here!" (sounds like "did not see" in Sanskrit)

若比丘在阿練若處住，有囚逃走，問比丘，如上畜生中答。
If a monk is residing in a forest dwelling and a prisoner escapes asking a monk, answer as mentioned above regarding animals.

若比丘僧中問異答異，得波夜提。
If a monk in the Sangha is questioned differently and answers differently, he incurs the offense of pacittiya.

眾多人中和上、阿闍梨前，諸長老比丘前，問異答異，得越毘尼罪。
In the presence of many people, preceptors, and senior monks, if questioned differently and answered differently, it is a transgression of the Vinaya.

是故說。
Thus it is said


，廣說如上。
When the Buddha lived in the city of Śrāvastī, he elaborated as above.

爾時世人信敬深厚，多持飲食供養世尊，并奉眾僧，尊者舍利弗、目連。
At that time, people had deep faith and respect, often bringing food to offer to the World Honored One, also serving the assembly of monks, Venerable Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana.

供佛者，侍者收攝；與眾僧及舍利弗、目連者，或行、或不行，無人料理停置臭穢。
Those who offered to the Buddha had attendants to tidy up; as for those bringing to the assembly and Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, whether they went or not, nobody took care of the leftover waste, leaving it dirty and smelly.

爾時尊者陀驃在學地，作是念：「若我得無學者當營理僧事使得安樂。」
At that time, Venerable Dhritaka was in a learning state and thought, "If I obtain non-learning, I should manage the monks' affairs for their peace and happiness."

作是念已，初夜後夜精勤行道，即成阿羅漢，得三明六通已作是念：「我何須作有為事？我應當修習樂於少欲無事。」
Having this thought, diligently practicing in the first and last watches of the night, he became an Arhat, possessing the three knowledges and six penetrations, then thought, "Why should I engage in intentional actions? I should practice delighting in few desires and non-doing."

佛語陀驃：「汝本在學地時，作如是言：『我若得無學者當料理僧事。』汝作如是語不？」
The Buddha said to Dhritaka, "When you were in the learning state, you said, 'If I obtain non-learning, I will manage the monks' affairs.' Did you say this?"

答言：「實爾，世尊！」
He replied, "Indeed, World Honored One!"

佛言：「陀驃！如汝先願，今者應作。」
The Buddha said, "Dhritaka! According to your original vow, you should now act upon it."

答言：「當如世尊教。」
He replied, "I will follow the World Honored One's instruction."

爾時僧即拜知九事，如先說。
Then the monks respectfully acknowledged the nine matters, as stated before.

爾時隨宜差食，若是長老上座與上食、中坐與中間食、下座與麁食。
At that time, food was allocated as appropriate: senior elders received the best food, middle-ranking monks the average food, and junior monks the coarse food.

六群比丘怨情嫌恨，以是事往白世尊。
The group of six monks felt resentful because of this and went to report it to the World Honored One.

佛語陀驃：「凡出家人法應平等與食，汝當知得少不足、得多者亦無厭，得好、得惡俱不周悉。」
The Buddha told Dhritaka, "In the law of renunciants, food should be distributed equally. You should know that receiving less is insufficient, receiving more is not dissatisfying, and receiving both good and bad is not comprehensive."

於是長老陀驃即作三品食，精麁次第周而復始。
So Elder Dhritaka made three grades of food, rotating the fine to the coarse in sequence.

爾時難陀、優波難陀，晨起著入聚落衣持鉢往至食家。
At that time, Nanda and Upananda rose in the morning, put on their robes, carried their alms bowls, and went to a food house.

語優婆夷言：「與我食。」
He spoke to the laywoman, saying, "Give me food."

優婆夷言：「尊者！食時未至，我未得洗面及洗器物，未得作出家人食。」
The laywoman replied, "Venerable! The meal time has not arrived; I have not washed my face or the utensils and have not prepared food for the renunciants."

時檀越婦女弱小方起，澡浴裸露形體者，時難陀比丘不攝諸根縱看女色，
At that time, while the patron's young wife had just risen, bathed, and was naked, Bhikkhu Nanda did not restrain his senses and freely looked at the woman's form.

優婆夷作是念：「此比丘非毘尼人或生過惡，不中久停，且與作人麁食速遣令去。」
The laywoman thought, "This monk is not restrained and may grow wrong; he shouldn't stay long, but give him coarse food quickly to send him away."

作是念已，即與作使人麁食，是比丘得食已即還精舍。
Having thought this, she gave him coarse food, and this monk, after receiving food, returned to the monastery.

爾時有長老比丘，時到著入聚落衣持鉢，威儀庠序往至食家，
Then there was an elder monk, arriving at the right time, putting on his robes, carrying his alms bowl, and proceeding with dignity and order to the food house.

檀越施種種美食滿鉢而還。
The patron offered various delicious foods, filling the bowl, and he returned.

時難陀、優波難陀見已作如是言：「長老陀驃！世尊說平等分食，觀此二食為平等不？」
When Nanda and Upananda saw this, they said, "Elder Dhritaka! The World Honored One says food should be distributed equally. Look, are these two meals equal?"

陀驃言：「汝往太早，非是食時。」
Dhritaka said, "You went too early; it wasn't meal time."

明日難陀著入聚落衣持鉢入城，路中看象鬪馬鬪，聽俗人言論。
The next day, Nanda put on his robes, carried his alms bowl, and entered the city. On the way, he watched elephants fighting horses and listened to the worldly people's discussions.

時優婆夷念言：「阿闍梨昨日來不得食，今應早辦。」
At that time, the laywoman thought, "The master did not get food yesterday, so today I should prepare early."

檀越家作食久辦，至時不來。
The patron's house prepared food for a long time, but when the time came, he didn't arrive.

優婆夷復作是念：「尊者昨日來早，今日何故不來？祇洹精舍中或有供僧，是故不來。」
The laywoman thought again, "The venerable came early yesterday; why hasn't he come today? Perhaps there is an offering to the monks in Jeta's Grove, so he didn’t come."

即共夫主小兒食盡。
Then she finished the meal with her husband and child.

時難陀逼中方來，語優婆夷言：「與我食。」
When Nanda finally came urgently, he said to the laywoman, "Give me food."

優婆夷言：「我作食早辦，待尊者不來，謂祇洹中有人供僧，謂受彼請，此所供食我已噉盡。」
The laywoman replied, "I prepared the food early, waited for you but you didn't come. I thought someone might be offering to the monks in Jeta's Grove and accepted their invitation, so I finished this offered food."

難陀語言：「今欲斷我食耶？」
Nanda said, "Do you intend to cut off my food now?"

爾時優婆夷即以家中作人殘宿食與之，得已還詣精舍，廣說如上。
Then the laywoman gave him the leftovers from the previous night prepared at home. After receiving it, he returned to the monastery and elaborated as above.

陀驃言：「汝去太晚。」
Dhritaka said, "You went too late."

時尊者陀驃以是因緣往白世尊，
Then Venerable Dhritaka reported this cause to the World Honored One,

佛言：「呼難陀來。」
The Buddha said, "Call Nanda here."

來已，佛問難陀：「汝實爾不？」
When he came, the Buddha asked Nanda, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。世尊！」
He replied, "Indeed, World Honored One!"

佛言：「此是惡事。汝常不聞我以無數方便，毀呰多欲、讚歎少欲？
The Buddha said, "This is a bad matter. Have you not often heard me, with countless means, criticize being greedy and praise having few desires?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」
This is not law, not discipline, not according to the Buddha's teaching, it cannot nurture good dharmas."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha told the monks, "All living in dependence on the city of Śrāvastī should assemble, for the sake of ten benefits, a discipline is made for the monks, even those who have heard should listen again.

若比丘嫌責者，波夜提。」
If a monk is blamed or criticized, he incurs a Pācittiya offense."



比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu is as described above.




嫌責者，若拜人、拜囑人、拜囑囑人。
The criticized one is someone who assigns tasks to others, assigns others to assign tasks, or assigns others to assign others.

拜人者，如尊者陀驃，是名拜人。
The one who assigns tasks, like the venerable Thera Thull, is called a task assigner.

拜囑人者，如陀驃摩羅子，倩餘人料理僧事，是名拜囑人。
The one who assigns others to assign tasks, like Thera Malla's son who employs others to manage monastic affairs, is called an assigner of task assigners.

拜囑囑人者，所倩人復轉倩人料理僧事，是名拜囑囑人。
The one who assigns someone, who then further employs others to manage monastic affairs, is called an assigner of assigners.

嫌責是人者，得波夜提。
Criticizing such a person results in a minor disciplinary offense.



波夜提者，如上說。
The term "Prajñapti" is as described above.




種餅，當次第來應取。
If various pastries are being served among the monks, they should be taken in order.

若意中不欲者令過去，若淨人問：「何以不取？」
If someone does not want any, they can let it pass. If a pure person asks, "Why aren't you taking any?"

答言：「我不用是。」欲更取餘者，無罪。
They should answer, "I don't want any." There is no fault in wanting to take more.

若行乳粥、酪粥、胡麻粥、魚肉粥，若行如是種種粥時，若滿杓與上座，上座不應便受。
If serving rice porridge, butter porridge, sesame porridge, or fish porridge, and during such servings if a full ladle is offered to the senior monk, the senior should not just accept it.

上座應言：「平等與。」
The senior should say, "Distribute it equally."

若行肉時偏與上座多者，上座應問：「一切盡爾耶？」
If meat is being served preferentially to the senior, the senior should ask, "Is everyone receiving this amount?"

答言：「止與上座多耳。」上座應語：「平等與。」
If answered, "Only the senior receives more," the senior should say, "Distribute it equally."

若不須多者少取，少取已語餘人：「平等與。」
If more is not needed, take less and tell others, "Distribute it equally."

如是好食應平等與。
Such good food should be distributed equally.

若沙彌行食時偏與師者，知事人應言：「平等與。」
If a novice gives more food to the teacher during distribution, the knowledgeable person should say, "Distribute it equally."

若沙彌言：「汝何以不自行？」是知事人應推此沙彌出，更使餘人行。
If the novice says, "Why don't you distribute it yourself?" the knowledgeable person should dismiss this novice and have someone else distribute.

若行食人見僧中大德人便多與，餘人便少與。
If the distributor sees a virtuous monk and gives more to them while giving less to others,

知事人應語行食人言：「僧中無高下，汝平等與。」
the knowledgeable person should tell the distributor, "There is no hierarchy among the monks; distribute equally."



或有嫌而非呵責

There may be disapproval without reproach

或有呵責非嫌

There may be reproach without disapproval

或亦嫌亦呵責

There may be both disapproval and reproach

或非嫌非呵責

There may be neither disapproval nor reproach

嫌而非呵責者

Disapproval without reproach

持己器中食比比坐器中食

Taking one's food from a container and comparing it with others' food in containers

作如是言：「此平等不？」

Saying: "Is this equal or not?"

是名嫌而非呵責

This is called disapproval without reproach

如是四句廣說

Thus the four statements are elaborated

嫌而不呵責，得越毘尼罪

Disapproval without reproach results in a minor offense

呵責而不嫌者，得越毘尼罪

Reproach without disapproval results in a minor offense

亦嫌亦呵責者，得波夜提罪

Both disapproval and reproach result in a serious offense

非嫌不呵責，無罪

Neither disapproval nor reproach results in no offense

是故說

Thus it is said




佛在跋祇國人間遊行，與比丘眾俱至一故河邊。
The Buddha was traveling in the Vajji country among people and reached an old riverside together with a group of monks.

時諸捕魚人捉網捕魚，諸比丘見已白佛言：「世尊！是捕魚人不應作是事而勤作。」
At that time, some fishermen were casting nets to catch fish. When the monks saw this, they said to the Buddha, "World-honored One, these fishermen should not diligently do such things."

世尊因諸比丘問已，即說偈言：
In response to the monks' question, the World-honored One then spoke a verse:



已得難得身，
Having already obtained this rare body,

云何作諸惡？
how could one commit various evils?




染愛著身故，  
Having attachment due to love,

命終入惡道。  
at the end of life, enters the evil path.




時捕魚人捉大網，

At that time, the fishermen were casting a large net,

沈石浮瓠順水而上，

Sinking stones and floating gourds were drifting along with the current,

邊各二百五十人，

With 250 people on each side,

叫喚挽網向岸。

Shouting and pulling the net towards the shore.

諸比丘見已白佛言：

Upon seeing this, the monks said to the Buddha:

「世尊！此人若於佛法中如是精進者，

"World Honored One! If these people were just as diligent in the Buddha's teachings,

大得法利。」

They would gain great benefit from the Dharma."

爾時世尊因事而說偈言：

At that time, the World Honored One spoke a verse in relation to this event:




所謂勤精進，
What is called diligent progress,

非名一切欲；
Is not the desire for fame;




謂能離眾惡，　　
Able to depart from all evils,

以法自活命。
and live by the law for one's subsistence.




本生經》中廣說。
As extensively described in the Kapilavastu Sutra.

爾時眾魚墮網中，有一大魚有百頭，頭頭各異。
At that time, many fish were caught in the net, among them a big fish with a hundred different heads.

世尊見之便喚其字，即應世尊。
The World Honored One saw it and called its name, to which it responded immediately.

世尊問言：「汝母在何處？」
The World Honored One asked, "Where is your mother?"

答言：「某圊廁中作虫。」
It replied, "She is a worm in a latrine."

佛言：「此大魚，迦葉佛時作三藏比丘，惡口故受雜類頭報。
The Buddha said, "This big fish was a Tripitaka monk during the time of Kasyapa Buddha, and because of malicious speech, it is reborn with mixed heads as retribution.

母受其利養故作廁中虫。」
Its mother became a worm in a latrine because she benefited from it.

佛說此因緣，時五百人即止網出家修道，皆得羅漢，住跋渠河邊。
When the Buddha explained this cause, five hundred people immediately left their nets, became monks, and all attained Arhatship, residing by the Vaggumuda River.

佛告阿難：「為此諸客比丘敷床座。」
The Buddha told Ananda, "Arrange beds and seats for these guest monks."

乃至阿難白佛：「願佛安慰客比丘。」
Then Ananda said to the Buddha, "Please comfort these guest monks."

佛告阿難：「汝自不知我已入四禪中安慰客比丘。」
The Buddha replied to Ananda, "You do not realize that I have already entered the fourth dhyana to comfort the guest monks."

爾時各在露地敷床褥欲乞食，
At that time, each laid out beds and mats in the open ground to beg for food,

時至此諸比丘各以神力，有至北欝單越者三十三天者、龍王宮乞食者，
On that occasion, these monks, using their supernatural powers, went to places like Uttarakuru, the Trayastrimsa Heaven, and the Dragon King's palace to beg for food.

床褥在露地日炙風飄塵坌污穢，
Beds and mats in the open ground were scorched by the sun, blown by the wind, and soiled with dust and dirt.

佛知而故問，諸比丘以上因緣具白世尊，
The Buddha knew but asked intentionally, and the monks reported this cause to the World Honored One.

佛言：「待此諸比丘來。」
The Buddha said, "Wait for these monks to come."

來已，佛問諸比丘：「汝實爾不？」
When they came, the Buddha asked the monks, "Is this true?"

答言：「實爾。」
They replied, "It is true."

佛言：「從今日因汝為諸比丘制戒。」
The Buddha said, "From today onwards, I will establish a rule for monks because of you."

佛告諸比丘：「依止跋渠河者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，
The Buddha instructed the monks, "All those residing by the Vaggumuda River should assemble, and for ten advantages, I will establish a rule for monks,

乃至已聞者當重聞。
Even those who have heard it before should hear it again.

若比丘僧住處，露地臥床、坐床褥枕，
If a monk's dwelling place, in open ground lies a bed or sits on a mat or pillow,

若自敷、若使人敷，
Whether one lays it out oneself or has someone lay it out,

去時不自舉、不使人舉，波夜提。」
And upon leaving, does not lift it oneself or have someone else lift it, it is a minor offense (Pācittiya). 




比丘者，如上說。
A bhikkhu, as described above.




僧住處者，若阿練若住處、若聚落住處。
Where a monk resides, whether in the wilderness or in a settlement.




臥床、坐床者，有十四種：
There are fourteen types of lying down and sitting beds:

團脚臥床、團脚坐床、
Round leg lying bed, round leg sitting bed,

臥褥、坐褥、
Lying mattress, sitting mattress,

開藤臥床、開藤坐床、
Open rattan lying bed, open rattan sitting bed,

烏那陀臥床、烏那陀坐床、
Unada lying bed, Unada sitting bed,

陀彌臥床、陀彌坐床。
Tammy lying bed, Tammy sitting bed.




褥者，劫貝褥、毛毳褥、氈褥迦尸褥、草褥。
Mats, whether made of silk, wool, felt, Kashi mats, or grass mats.




劫貝枕

Coconut shell pillow

毛毳枕

Wool pillow

氈枕

Felt pillow

迦尸枕

Silk pillow




敷者，若自敷、若使人敷。
To apply is to either apply it oneself or have someone else apply it.




去者，餘行。
The one who leaves, I continue.




不舉者，
Those who do not raise,

不自舉、
Do not raise themselves,

不使人舉，
And do not make others raise,

波夜提。
Offense of transgression.



波夜提者，如上說。
Bo Ye Ti is as mentioned above.




若欲露地說法者，知床褥人敷床褥已，若去離二十五肘不囑者，波夜提罪。
If someone wants to preach outdoors, knowing that the mat has been spread, if they leave beyond 25 cubits without informing, it is an offense of Pārājika.

若二人共知者，一人欲行時，應囑第二人。
If two people are aware, when one wants to leave, they should inform the second person.

第二人欲行者，應待第一人還付囑已然後當去。
If the second person wants to leave, they should wait for the first person to return and inform them before going.

若敷床褥訖有後人來坐，知敷人得捨去，無罪。
If the mat has been spread and another person comes to sit, the person who spread it can leave without guilt.

若春月露地敷置，年少比丘坐上眠，即囑彼比丘。
If in spring, the mat is spread outdoors and a young monk sits and sleeps, inform that monk.

若床上無比丘者，若比丘夜起大小行觸僧床，一一觸已捨去，隨所觸一一得波夜提。
If there is no monk on the bed, if a monk gets up at night and touches a monk's bed, they commit an offense of Pārājika with each touch.

若是床上有比丘者，即囑彼人，無罪。
If there is a monk on the bed, simply inform them and there is no guilt.

若僧知事人欲付床褥故，出著露地捨離二十五肘，得波夜提。
If a monk responsible for belongings places the mat outdoors and leaves it beyond 25 cubits, they commit an offense of Pārājika.

若受得僧床褥暴曬時，捨去離二十五肘，亦波夜提。
If during sunny weather, a monk leaves a mat beyond 25 cubits, they also commit an offense of Pārājika.

若比丘病，在露處眠，弟子來禮師；若師起去，弟子應舉覆處；
If a monk is ill and sleeping outdoors, and a disciple comes to pay respects; if the teacher gets up and leaves, the disciple should cover the area.

若有二人共坐一床；若上坐欲去時應囑下坐，下坐欲去時應白上坐言：「我欲去，此床當舉何處？」
If two people share a bed; if the one sitting above wants to leave, they should inform the one sitting below and vice versa by saying, "I want to leave, where should we place this bed?"

上坐若言：「汝自去，此床我自當舉。」爾時去，無罪。
If the one sitting above says, "You can leave, I will take care of the bed," then leaving is without guilt.

若比丘為和上、阿闍梨敷床褥已而去者，越毘尼罪。
If a monk spreads a mat for a teacher or preceptor and then leaves, they commit a Vinaya offense.

若和上、阿闍梨知為我敷，去時應囑，若不囑去者，越毘尼罪。
If the teacher or preceptor knows that the mat is spread for them, they should inform when leaving; failure to do so results in a Vinaya offense.



二十五肘者，得極大麁雨時不徹，兩重衣故也。
A span of twenty-five elbows withstands even the heaviest rough rain, due to the double-layered garment.




若比丘眾僧床上安形像，餘比丘來禮拜，手觸而不舉者，波夜提。
If a monk places an image on the monks' bed and another monk comes to pay respects, touching it but not lifting it, it is a pācittiya offense.

若眾多比丘次第禮拜，手觸屬最後者。
If many monks pay respects in succession and the touching is related to the last monk, it pertains to him.



或囑授非是屬、或屬非是囑授、或亦囑亦屬、或非囑非屬。
There are those who are instructed but not affiliated, those who are affiliated but not instructed, those who are both instructed and affiliated, and those who are neither instructed nor affiliated.

囑而非屬者，沙彌是。
Those who are instructed but not affiliated are novices.

屬而非囑者，上座比丘是。
Those who are affiliated but not instructed are senior monks.

亦囑亦屬者，下座比丘是。
Those who are both instructed and affiliated are junior monks.

非囑非屬者，俗人是。
Those who are neither instructed nor affiliated are laypeople.




若大德比丘多有弟子，為敷床褥；

If a venerable monk has many disciples, they should prepare the beddings for him;

若師知為己敷，去時應囑人舉，不囑者得越毘尼罪。

If the teacher knows that the beddings were laid out for him, he should instruct someone to remove them when leaving, failing which is an offense.

若眾僧床褥在眾僧住處露地敷，去時不舉者，得波夜提。

If communal monks' beddings are laid out in an open area of the monastery and not removed when leaving, it is an offense.

眾僧床褥在私住處露地敷，去時不舉，越毘尼。

If communal monks' beddings are laid out in an open area of a private residence and not removed when leaving, it is a transgression.

若私床褥在僧露地敷，去時不舉，得越毘尼罪。

If private beddings are laid out in an open area for monks and not removed when leaving, it is an offense.

若私床褥在私露地敷，去時不舉，越毘尼罪。

If private beddings are laid out in a private open area and not removed when leaving, it is a transgression.

僧床褥在白衣家敷，去時不舉者，越毘尼罪。

If monks' beddings are laid out in a layperson's house and not removed when leaving, it is a transgression.

若俗人床褥在露地敷，去應語令知。

If laypeople's beddings are laid out in an open area, they should be informed before leaving.

是故說。

Thus it is said.




，廣說如上。  
The Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and extensively expounded as above.

時有婆羅門，宿請眾僧供食施衣，諸比丘僧房內敷僧坐具，不收歛便徑去。  
At that time, there was a Brahmin who had previously invited the sangha to provide food and clothing. The monks laid out seating in the monk's quarters but did not tidy up before leaving.

世尊以五事利益故，五日一行諸比丘房，見諸比丘房內敷具，上有虫鼠糞穢塵土不淨，佛知而故問，諸比丘以是因緣具白世尊。  
The Blessed One, for the benefit of five matters, inspected the rooms of the monks every five days. He saw the untidy furnishings with insects, mouse droppings, filth, and dust. The Buddha knew of this situation and inquired, and the monks explained the reasons to the Blessed One.

佛告諸比丘：「汝等出家人更無給使為汝料理後事，去時何故不舉？此非法、非律、不如佛教，不可以是長養善法。」  
The Buddha told the monks, "You, as renunciants, have no attendants to manage things for you. Why do you not put things away when you leave? This is not lawful, it is not in accordance with discipline, not in line with the Buddha's teaching, and it cannot foster good practices."

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者盡集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。若比丘內覆處自敷床褥、若使人敷，去時不自舉、不使人舉，波夜提。」  
The Buddha instructed the monks, "Those residing in association with the city of Shravasti, gather completely. It is for ten benefits that I impose a rule on the monks, even those who have heard should hear again. If a monk lays down bedding himself or has someone else lay it down and does not tidy up himself or does not have someone else do so when departing, it is an offense of Pacittiya."




比丘者，如上說。
Monks, as stated above.




內者，是覆處。  
Inside, is the hidden place.  




坐著的人，有十四種，如上所述。  
The seated person has fourteen types, as mentioned above.  




枕褥者，亦如上說。
The pillows and bedding are also as mentioned above.




无论是自己敷，还是让别人帮忙敷。
Whether applying it yourself or having someone else do it.




去者，餘處去。
The person who leaves, if they depart, remains elsewhere.




不自舉者，不自舉。
One who does not promote themselves, they do not promote themselves.

不使人舉者，不使他人舉，波夜提。
One who does not let others promote, does not allow others to promote, is Prajnaparamita.



波夜提者，如上說。

The presentation of the night wave, as previously stated.




若比丘欲餘行去時，房舍內水灑掃地令淨，以巨磨塗地，褥枕曬令燥，

If a monk wants to leave for other travel, he should clean the room by sprinkling water and sweeping, smooth the floor with a stone, and dry the mat and pillow.

語知床褥人作如是言：「長老！是床褥枕，一切應付囑示語。」

He should speak to the person responsible for the bed and mat like this: "Elder! This bed and pillow should all be entrusted and notified."

若知床褥人是下座者，應語言：「當攝此床褥。」答言：「爾。」

If he knows the person responsible is a junior, he should say: "Take care of this bed and mat." The junior should respond, "Yes."

若上座者付囑此床褥，答言：「爾。」

If the elder entrusts this bed and mat, respond with "Yes."

去不白者，波夜提。

Leaving without informing is a minor transgression.

若不白去時，有比丘即入房住，不空故得越毘尼罪。

If he leaves without informing and a monk moves into the room, he commits a Vinaya breach because it is not empty.

若已去忘衣鉢，還來取而白者，無罪。

If he has left and forgets his robe and bowl, and comes back to take them while informing, there is no offense.

若比丘隨道行，天陰欲雨，年少比丘先去往至精舍，

If a monk is traveling and the sky is overcast with a chance of rain, a younger monk may first go to the monastery.

為和上、阿闍梨取床褥已，天晴欲去者，當白。

After taking the bed and mat for the preceptor and teacher, if the weather clears and he wants to leave, he should inform.

若不白去者，波夜提。

If he leaves without informing, it is a minor transgression.

若眾多比丘在聚落精舍中宿，共受僧床褥，

If many monks are staying in a village monastery, sharing the beds and mats of the community,

各各作是念：「某甲故當付囑。」

Each thinks, "Such and such a person should be entrusted."

去已道中展轉相問，都無囑者，

After leaving, they ask each other along the way, and no one has been entrusted.

諸比丘當差遣二人還付囑。

The monks should send two people back to entrust them.

若比丘在路行，至精舍中宿，去不囑床褥，

If a monk is traveling and stays at a monastery, and leaves without entrusting the bed and mat,

行遠已展轉相問，盡無付囑。

After traveling far, they ask each other, and no one has entrusted it.

道逢比丘即問言：「長老欲何處去？」答言：「我欲到某處。」

Upon meeting another monk on the way, he asks, "Elder, where do you intend to go?" The reply is, "I intend to go to such and such a place."

是比丘即白言：「我昨夜彼宿，來時忘不囑床褥，

The monk then says, "Last night I stayed there, and I forgot to entrust the bed and mat when I left,

長老到彼當為我付囑。」

Elder, when you reach there, please entrust it for me."

是比丘復言：「我來時亦忘不付囑，長老往彼精舍為我付囑。」

The monk also says, "When I came, I too forgot to entrust, elder please entrust for me at that monastery."

如是二人展轉相囑已，乃至齊入精舍界，得名囑授。

In this way, the two keep entrusting each other until they enter the monastery boundary, thereby fulfilling the entrustment.

若比丘在俗人家宿，得床褥臥具，去時應示語去。

If a monk stays at a layperson's house and receives bedding and sleeping equipment, he should inform when leaving.

若得草敷者，去時應語言：「此草欲安何處？」

If he gets a straw mat, he should ask when leaving, "Where should this straw be placed?"

隨主人語應安之。

It should be placed according to the owner's instructions.

若檀越言：「但去，我自當料理。」

If the benefactor says, "Just leave, I will take care of it myself."

比丘應小歛一角而去。

The monk should slightly gather a corner and leave.

若比丘行路挽亂草敷坐，去時聚已當去。

If a monk traveling on the road arranges the grass for sitting, he should gather it when leaving.

是故說。

Therefore, it is said.



，廣說如上。

The Buddha stayed in the city of Savatthi and explained as above.

時有客比丘，來到六群比丘房裏，六群比丘言：「善來長老！」

At that time, a visiting monk arrived at the residence of the Group of Six monks, and they said, "Welcome, venerable!"

作是語已與洗脚水、塗足油、非時漿。

After saying this, they offered him water to wash his feet, oil to rub on them, and an untimely drink.

止息已語客比丘言：「長老！汝欲何處住？」

After rest, they asked the visiting monk, "Venerable, where would you like to stay?"

答言：「此房中住。」

He replied, "I wish to stay in this abode."

六群比丘言：「汝知此是誰房？」

The Group of Six monks said, "Do you know whose residence this is?"

答言：「我知是眾僧房。」

He responded, "I know it is the monks' residence."

六群比丘言：「此雖僧房，我等六群比丘已先在此住。」

The Group of Six monks replied, "Although it is a monks' residence, we, the Group of Six, have previously been staying here."

客比丘言：「此是四方僧房，縱使十六群比丘先在中住，我亦當依次而住，何況六群比丘？」

The visiting monk said, "This is a residence for monks from all directions; even if sixteen groups were staying here, I would still reside according to the order, let alone just the Group of Six."

六群比丘語比丘言：「若長老欲住便住。」

The Group of Six monks said to the monk, "If you wish to stay, then stay."

客比丘住已，六群比丘即各各捉其手脚，或捉頭高舉欲出之。

After the visiting monk stayed, each of the Group of Six grabbed his hands and feet, or held his head high to pull him out.

時世尊以神足在虛空中來，六群比丘見世尊已即撲地而去。

At that moment, the Blessed One appeared in the sky using his supernatural powers, and upon seeing the Blessed One, the Group of Six prostrated and left.

佛語客比丘：「汝但在房中住。」

The Buddha said to the visiting monk, "You should just stay in the residence."

復次尊者難陀是優波難陀兄，難陀共行弟子乃至驅出房。

Moreover, the venerable Nanda is the elder brother of Upananda; Nanda together with his followers even drove others out of the dwelling.

出房已弟子大呼，諸比丘聞聲已皆驚出看，作如是言：「此比丘今日失二種利：斷食、失房。」

After being expelled, the disciples cried loudly; upon hearing the sound, the monks were astonished and came out to see, saying: "This monk today has lost two kinds of benefits: food and accommodation."

如是諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼六群比丘來。」

Thus, the monks went to inform the Blessed One about this incident, and the Buddha said, "Call the Group of Six monks here."

來已，佛問難陀、優波難陀：「汝實爾不？」

After they arrived, the Buddha asked Nanda and Upananda, "Is it true?"

答言：「實爾。」

They answered, "It is true."

佛言：「汝等云何於四方僧房中住，牽出客比丘？此是惡事。」

The Buddha said, "Why do you reside in a residence for monks from all directions and evict visiting monks? This is a bad deed."

汝常不聞我無量方便讚說，於梵行人所應修慈，身行修慈、口意行修慈，常供養供給耶？

Have you not always heard me extol boundless methods, and instruct those cultivating pure conduct to practice kindness in action, speech, and mind, and to always offer support and assistance?

此非法、非律、非如佛教，不可以是長養善法。

This is not the Dharma, not the discipline, not the Buddha’s teaching; it will not nurture good practices.

佛告諸比丘：「依止舍衛城住者皆悉令集，以十利故與諸比丘制戒，乃至已聞者當重聞。」

The Buddha told the monks, "Those residing in the city of Savatthi should all gather; for the sake of ten benefits, I will establish a rule for the monks, so even those who have heard it before should hear it again."

若比丘在僧房內，若自牽出、若使人牽出，乃至言：『比丘汝出去。』作是語者，波夜提。

If a monk is inside a monks' residence, whether pulling someone out personally or having others do so, or even saying, 'Monk, you go out,' it constitutes a violation.


比丘者，如上說。  
A bhikkhu is as stated above.




若比丘牽比丘出時，彼比丘若抱柱、若捉戶、若倚壁，如是牽離一一處，一一波夜提。
If a monk drags another monk out, and the monk holds onto a pillar, a door, or leans against a wall, pulling him away from each place incurs a pācittiya each time.

若口呵叱遣彼比丘，隨語離一一處者，一一波夜提。
If verbally scolding and sending the monk away, and he leaves each place as commanded, it incurs a pācittiya each time.

若方便驅直出門者，得一波夜提。
If using expedient means to directly drive him out the door, it incurs one pācittiya.

若比丘瞋恚蛇鼠驅出，越毘尼罪。
If a monk drives out snakes or rats out of anger, it is an offense against the Vinaya.

若作是言：「此是無益之物。」驅出無罪。
If saying "This is a useless thing" and drives it out, there is no offense.

若駱駝、牛馬在塔寺中，畏污壞塔寺，驅出者無罪。
If camels, cows, or horses are in a stupa or monastery and there is fear of contamination or destruction, driving them out incurs no offense.

若比丘驅比丘出，波夜提。
If a monk drives another monk out, it incurs a pācittiya.

若驅比丘尼出，偷蘭遮。
If a monk drives a nun out, it incurs a grave offense.

若驅式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，得越毘尼罪。
If driving out a sikkhamānā, novice monk, or novice nun, it incurs an offense against the Vinaya.

下至驅俗人出，越毘尼心悔。
Even driving out laypeople violates the Vinaya and should be repented.

是故說。(十六竟)
Thus it is said. (End of section sixteen)



摩訶僧祇律卷第十四
The Mahasanghika Vinaya, Volume 14




