eady to help with the translation. Please provide the text you would like to have translated


摩訶僧祇律者，是大眾部所誦之律。

The Mahasanghika Vinaya is the monastic code recited by the Mahasanghika school.

是謂出家修行者之所應循也。

It is what those who have renounced worldly life and practice should follow.

彼律中行止坐臥，無不具載。

In that Vinaya, all behaviors, sitting, walking, and lying down, are fully described.

設有所犯，則須悔過懺悔。

If there is any transgression, one must confess and repent.

如是乃得清淨無礙。

Only then can one attain purity and freedom from obstacles.

守此律者，得增長智慧福德。

Those who uphold this Vinaya will increase in wisdom and merit.




# 【版本记录】发行日期：2024-08，最后更新：2024-07-12

# [Version History] Release Date: 2024-08, Last Updated: 2024-07-12




#【编辑说明】本资料库由 财团法人佛教电子佛典基金会（CBETA）依「大正新修大藏经」所编辑

#【Editing Instructions】This database is edited by the Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) based on the "Taishō Revised Tripitaka".




提供者：蕭鎮國大德

Provider: Master Xiao Zhenguo

伽耶山基金會提供

Provided by Gaya Mountain Foundation

北美某大德提供

Provided by a certain master in North America

釋本禪法師提供新式標點

Venerable Shi Ben Chan provided new punctuation style




【其他事項】

Other Information

本資料庫可自由免費流通，

This database can be freely circulated without charge,

詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】

Please refer to the "Buddhist Electronic Text Foundation Database Copyright Declaration" for detailed content.




inly! Please provide the lines you would like me to translate, and I will assist you with that


摩訶僧祇律卷第二十六東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
The Maha-samghika Vinaya, Volume 26, translated by the Tripitaka Master Buddha Bhadra and Fa Xian from the land of Tianzhu during the Eastern Jin Dynasty.




明雜誦跋渠法之四  
Ming Za Song Ba Qu Fa Zhi Si  




丘覆藏罪乞別住已，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」

This offense is when a monk hides a transgression and, having requested to live separately, says to another monk, "Elder! I have another Sanghadisesa."

比丘問言：「是本罪？中間罪？」

The monk asks, "Is it the original offense? An intermediate offense?"

答言：「是本罪。」

He answers, "It is the original offense."

復問：「覆不覆？」

He further asks, "Did you conceal it?"

答言：「覆。」

The answer is, "I concealed it."

比丘語言：「長老！先別住者已如法行，今所說覆者，當更乞別住已，是兩罪合行波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

The monk says, "Elder! The previously separated one already acted according to the law. Now, for what you have confessed to hiding, you should again request to live separately. Thus, these two offenses are to be dealt with by observing probation, undergoing observance, and facing the assembly."

是名別乞共行波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。

This is called requesting separately and undergoing probation, undergoing observance, and facing the assembly together.


索別住行至半，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」

A monk, concealing his offense, requested separate dwelling and halfway through, said to the monk, "Elder! I have another Saṅghāvaśeṣa."

比丘問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」

The monk asked, "Is it the original offense, or an intermediary offense?"

答言：「是本罪。」

He replied, "It is the original offense."

復問：「覆不覆？」

He further asked, "Concealed or not concealed?"

答言：「覆。」

He replied, "Concealed."

比丘應語：「汝先別住者已如法行，今所覆者應更乞別住已，是兩罪合行波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

The monk should say, "As you have already dwelt separately according to the procedure for the previous offense, now for the concealed one you should again request separate dwelling; these are two combined offenses to be dealt with through the Pārājika observance, joint Manastā, and Uddesaniya."

是名別乞共行波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。

This is called the joint request observance through Pārājika, joint Manastā, and Uddesaniya.




乞別住行竟，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」

The monk, after concealing his offense, asked to be separated and finished his practice. He then said to the monk, "Elders! I have another Saṅghādisesa."

比丘問言：「本罪、中間罪？」答言：「本罪。」

The monk asked, "Is it an original offense or an intermediate offense?" He replied, "An original offense."

復問：「覆不覆？」答言：「覆。」

He further asked, "Concealed or not concealed?" He replied, "Concealed."

應語言：「先別住者已如法行，今所覆者應更乞別住行已，是二罪合乞摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

One should say, "Having been separated previously and conducted oneself in accordance with the law, now, for the concealed offense, one should again request separation to fulfill the requirement; these two offenses combined warrant asking for mānatta and joining for two fortnightly ceremonies."

是名別乞別行波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。

This is called a separate request for separation, joint practice of mānatta, and joint participation in fortnightly ceremonies. 




行波利婆沙竟，乞摩那埵已，復言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」

After the monk has concealed his transgressions and completed the Pratihara Poya session, he further states, "Elder, I have another Sangha Prasada."

應問：「是本罪、中間罪？」

He should be asked, "Is this an original transgression or an intervening transgression?"

答言：「是本罪。」

The answer should be, "It is an original transgression."

問：「覆不覆？」

He is asked, "Was it concealed or not?"

答言：「覆。」

The answer is, "Concealed."

應語：「先波利婆沙摩那埵已如法行，今所覆者，應更乞波利婆沙行竟，更乞摩那埵，是二罪合行已共阿浮呵那。」

He should be told, "Having first performed the appropriate Pratihara Poya and Kamanata according to the rules, now for what was concealed, you should again request the Pratihara Poya. After completing it and again requesting Kamanata, you will perform the combination of the two transgressions together with the Apologetic Prostration."

是名別乞別行波利婆沙、別乞合行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。

This is called separately requesting and performing the Pratihara Poya, separately requesting and performing the Kamanata, and collectively the Apologetic Prostration.



丘覆藏罪行波利婆沙竟，乞摩那埵行至半，
The monk concealed his wrongdoing until half of the probation period had passed,

復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
then he told the monk, "Elder! I have another Sanghadisesa offense."

乃至應語：「先摩那埵已如法行，
He should be told, "The previous probation was conducted according to the law,

今所覆者應更乞波利婆沙，
now you should request another probation period for your concealed wrongdoing,

行已更乞摩那埵，
after serving this, you should request probation again,

是二罪合行摩那埵共阿浮呵那。」
these two offenses should be expiated together with probation and the acknowledgment."

是名別乞別行波利婆沙，別乞共行摩那埵共阿浮呵那。
This is called requesting separate probation periods and jointly expiating with probation and acknowledgment.




比丘覆藏罪行波利婆沙摩那埵竟，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk who concealed his offense of Pārājika and Saṃghādisesa then said to the other monk, "Elder! I have another Saṃghādisesa."

乃至應語：「先波利婆沙摩那埵已如法行，今所覆者應更乞波利婆沙摩那埵行已，是二罪合乞阿浮呵那。」
Until he should say, "The previous Pārājika and Saṃghādisesa have been properly performed, now what was concealed should again seek the practice of Pārājika, and the two offenses together should seek Avowal."

是名別乞別行波利婆沙、摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
This is called separately seeking, separately practicing Pārājika, Saṃghādisesa, and jointly seeking Avowal.




比丘覆藏罪行波利婆沙摩那埵阿浮呵那竟，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk, after covering up his offenses and completing the proceedings of Paṇaika, Mānadaka, and Ābhūhana, further spoke to the monk, saying: "Elder! I still have a Saṁghavārṣika."

乃至應語言：「先波利婆沙、摩那埵、阿浮呵那已如法行，今所覆者應更乞波利婆沙、摩那埵、阿浮呵那。」
It should be said: "The prior acts of Paṇaika, Mānadaka, and Ābhūhana have been carried out in accordance with the Dharma, and now it is appropriate to request another session of Paṇaika, Mānadaka, and Ābhūhana for what is concealed."

是名別乞別行波利婆沙、摩那埵、阿浮呵那。
This is called requesting and conducting separate sessions of Paṇaika, Mānadaka, and Ābhūhana.



與波利婆沙已，語比丘言：「長老！我更有二僧伽婆尸沙。」

After the monk confesses his offenses and goes through probation, he says to the elder monk, "Elder, I still have two more serious offenses."

應問：「是本罪、中間罪？」

The elder should ask, "Is it the original offense or an intermediate offense?"

答言：「是本罪。」

He replies, "It is the original offense."

問言：「覆不覆？」

The elder asks, "Did you conceal it or not?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆。」

He replies, "One is concealed, one is not."

應語言：「先波利婆沙已如法行，今不覆者停，覆者更乞波利婆沙合行已，共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

The elder should say, "First, one should proceed according to the rules for the one not concealed. Then, for the concealed one, request further probation as necessary, followed by confession and reconciliation."

如是別住中別住竟、摩那埵初中竟、阿浮呵那竟，亦如上說。

Thus, the process of separate dwelling, initial and middle stages of reconciliation are completed as described above.




與波利婆沙已，復語諸比丘言：「長老！我更有三僧伽婆尸沙。」

The monk confessed his sins to the assembly and then said to the monks, "Elders! I have three more serious offenses."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」

They should ask, "Are these original crimes or intermediate ones?"

答言：「是本罪。」

The response should be, "These are original crimes."

復問：「覆不覆？」

They should then ask, "Are they concealed or not?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆、一疑。」

The response should be, "One is concealed, one is not, and one is doubtful."

應語言：「先波利婆沙已如法行，今不覆者停，疑者當決定，覆者當乞波利婆沙、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

They should say, "Proper procedures for poling justly have been done before. The uncovered ones should be stopped, the doubtful ones should be decided, and for the concealed ones, ask for poling, perform the probation, and join the assembly."

如是別住中別住竟、摩那埵初中竟、阿浮呵那竟，亦如上說，是名本罪。

Thus, in the interim periods, during the probation beginning and end, and the assembly periods, as stated above, these are called original crimes.



中間罪者，比丘覆藏罪行別住竟，語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
A monk reveals his concealed offense after completing his separate living and says, "Elder! I still have more Sanghadisesa offenses."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」
One should ask, "Is this an original offense or a subsequent one?"

答言：「是中間罪。」
He replies, "It is a subsequent offense."

問言：「何時犯？」
One asks, "When was it committed?"

答言：「別住中犯。」
He replies, "During the separate living."

問言：「覆不覆？」
One asks, "Was it concealed?"

答言：「覆。」
He replies, "Yes, it was concealed."

應語言：「長老！先別住者已如法行，但少一夜。」
One should say, "Elder! The previous separate living was conducted according to the rules, except for one night."

今覆者應更乞別住、合行共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
"Now, the one who concealed should request another separate living, join in performing the Manatta, and the uposatha together."

是名別乞共行別住、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
This is called requesting a separate living together, performing the Manatta, and the uposatha together.



行別住已，行摩那埵語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk, having concealed his offenses and living separately, spoke to another monk saying, "Elder! I have committed another Sanghadisesa."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」
He should ask, "Is this the original offense or an intermediate offense?"

答言：「中間罪。」
He replies, "An intermediate offense."

問言：「何時犯？」
He asks, "When was it committed?"

答言：「摩那埵中。」
He answers, "During probation."

問言：「覆不覆？」
He asks, "Was it concealed?"

答言：「覆。」
He replies, "Concealed."

應語：「長老！先別住摩那埵已如法行，但摩那埵中少一夜。
He should say, "Elder! Having initially lived separately and followed the probationary practice according to the rules, but missing one night during probation."

今覆者應更乞別住行已，更乞摩那埵合行，共阿浮呵那。」
Now the one who conceals should request to live separately again, request probation again, and join for ceremonial acts."

是名別乞別行別住、別乞摩那埵、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
This is called requesting separate residence, separate probation practice, joint probation practice, and joint ceremonial acts.




行別住、摩那埵、阿浮呵那竟，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」

A monk concealed his transgressions of separate living, Manatta, and Apology, then said to the monk: "Elder! I still have a Sanghabhisiṣa."

應問：「是本罪、中間罪？」

One should ask: "Is this the original offense or a later offense?"

答言：「中間罪。」

The response is: "A later offense."

問言：「何時犯？」

Ask: "When was it committed?"

答言：「別住中間犯。」

The response is: "Committed during separate living."

問言：「覆不覆？」

Ask: "Was it concealed or not?"

答言：「覆。」

The response is: "Concealed."

應語言：「長老！先別住已如法行，但少一夜摩那埵，阿浮呵那不成就。

One should say: "Elder! Separate living was properly conducted before, but one night of Manatta was missing, so Apology was not completed.

今覆罪應更乞別住合行已，更合乞摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

Now that the offense is concealed, one should ask for separate living again; after completing it, ask again for Manatta and complete Apology together."

是名別乞共行別住、合乞摩那埵。共阿浮呵那。

This is called separate begging to conduct separate living together and to jointly ask for Manatta with Apology together.



比丘覆藏罪行波利婆沙、摩那埵、阿浮呵那竟，復語比丘言：「長老！我更有僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk hid the transgressions of Parihāsaka, Manatta, and Avakanna, then said to the monk, "Elder! I have more offenses in the Sangha."

應問：「是本罪、中間罪？」
You should ask, "Is this an original offense or an intermediate offense?"

答言：「中間罪。」
He replied, "An intermediate offense."

問言：「何時犯？」
He was asked, "When was it committed?"

答言：「摩那埵中。」
He replied, "During the Manatta."

問言：「覆不覆？」
He was asked, "Was it concealed?"

答言：「覆。」
He replied, "It was concealed."

應語言：「先別住摩那埵者已如法行，但摩那埵中少一夜，阿浮呵那不成就。今所覆者應更乞別住，行已更乞摩那埵、合行共阿浮呵那。」
You should say, "The one who has properly practiced separate residence during the Manatta, except for being one night short during the Manatta, cannot fulfill the Avakanna. Now, the concealed one should again request separate residence, then request Manatta, and practice together with Avakanna."

是名別乞別行別住、別乞合行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
This is called separately requesting separate practice and residence, separately requesting combined practice during Manatta with the Avakanna.



比丘覆藏罪行別住中，語比丘言：「長老！我更有二僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk concealed his offenses while in separate residence and said to another monk, "Elder! I have two more Saṅghādisesa offenses."

問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」
Asked, "Is this an original offense or an intermediate one?"

答言：「中間罪。」
Answered, "An intermediate offense."

問：「何時犯？」
Asked, "When was it committed?"

答言：「別住中。」
Answered, "During separate residence."

問：「覆不覆？」
Asked, "Concealed or not concealed?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆。」
Answered, "One concealed, one not concealed."

應語：「先別住者已如法行，但少一夜，不覆者停。覆者更乞別住、合行共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」
Should be told, "The first separate residence has been conducted according to the law, but is short by one night. The offense not concealed should be halted. For the concealed one, request another separate residence, perform both the collective and individual Mānātta and the Ābhata ceremony together."

是名別乞合行別住、共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
This is called requesting a separate combined residence, jointly performing Mānātta, and the Ābhata ceremony.



行別住已，

After the monk concealed his offense and lived separately,

行摩那埵中語比丘言：「長老！我更有二僧伽婆尸沙。」

he spoke to the monk during the probation: "Elder! I have two more Saṅghādisesas."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」

He should ask: "Is this the original offense or an intermediate offense?"

答言：「中間。」

He replied: "Intermediate."

問：「何時犯？」

He asked: "When did you commit it?"

答言：「摩那埵中。」

He replied: "During the probation."

問：「覆不覆？」

He asked: "Did you conceal it or not?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆。」

He replied: "One concealed, one not concealed."

應語：「先別住摩那埵已如法行，但摩那埵中少一夜，今不覆者停，覆者應更乞別住行已，更合乞摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

He should say: "First, having lived separately and observed probation according to the rules, but not completing one night during probation, now for the one not concealed, it stops. For the one concealed, you should request to live separately again, and then join to request probation and join in the formal meeting."

是名別乞別行別住，合乞共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。

This is called separately requesting to live separately and practice separately, then joining to request joint practice of probation and joint formal meeting


比丘覆藏罪行別住、摩那埵、阿浮呵那竟，語比丘言：「長老！我更有二僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk concealed his offenses differently, completed "Manatva" and "Avuha", and told the monk: "Elder, I have two more offenses of the Sangha involving the 'Pacittiya'."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」
He should ask: "Is this the original offense or an intermediate one?"

答言：「中間。」
He answered: "Intermediate."

問：「何時犯？」
He asked: "When was the offense committed?"

答言：「別住中。」
He answered: "During the separate stay."

問言：「覆不覆？」
He asked: "Concealed or not concealed?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆。」
He answered: "One is concealed, the other is not."

應語：「先別住已如法行，但少一夜摩那埵，阿浮呵那不成就。今不覆者停，覆者應更乞別住合行行已，合乞摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」
He should say: "The prior separate stay was conducted according to the Dharma, but lacks one night of 'Manatva', and 'Avuha' is not accomplished. Now, the one not concealed will be paused, and the one that is concealed should request another separate stay to complete it, and combine it with requesting 'Manatva' and 'Avuha'."




比丘覆藏罪行別住、摩那埵、阿浮呵那竟，語比丘言：「長老！我更有二僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk concealed his offense and concluded separate residence, Manatta, Avuha, and told the monk: "Elder! I have two more Sangha’s Parajikas."

應問：「是本罪、中間罪？」
You should ask: "Is it the original offense or an intermediate offense?"

答言：「中間。」
He replied: "Intermediate."

問：「何時犯？」
Ask: "When was it committed?"

答言：「摩那埵中。」
He replied: "During Manatta."

問：「覆不覆？」
Ask: "Concealed or not?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆。」
He replied: "One concealed, one not concealed."

應語：「先別住摩那埵已如法行，但摩那埵中少一夜，阿浮呵那不成就。」
You should say: "First, follow the law by living separately during Manatta, but as you missed one night in Manatta, Avuha is not fulfilled."

今不覆者停，覆者應更乞別住行已，合乞摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
Now, for un-concealed offenses pause, for concealed, request separate residence again, and jointly request Manatta and Avuha.



藏罪行別住中，語比丘言：「長老！我更有三僧伽婆尸沙。」

Again there is a monk who concealed his offenses while in separate dwelling, saying to another monk: "Elder! I still have three Sanghadisesas."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」

You should ask: "Is it an original offense or a middle offense?"

答言：「中間。」

The reply: "Middle."

問言：「何時犯？」

Ask: "When did you commit it?"

答：「別住中。」

Answer: "While in separate dwelling."

問言：「覆不覆？」

Ask: "Concealed or not concealed?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆、一疑。」

Reply: "One concealed, one not concealed, one doubtful."

應語：「先別住者已如法行，但少一夜。今不覆者停，疑者當決定，覆者應更乞別住合行，共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」

You should say: "The former who dwelt separately acted according to the rule, but was short by one night. For the one not concealed, stop; the doubtful one should be decided; the concealed one should ask again for separate dwelling together, and practice Manao and Avuhana together."

至摩那埵中更說亦如是。

When reaching the Manao process, say it again likewise.




比丘覆藏罪行別住摩那埵、阿浮呵那竟，語比丘言：「長老！我更有三僧伽婆尸沙。」
The monk concealed his transgressions, and after his separate ordination and confession, he said to the monk, "Elder! I have three more Sangha offenses."

應問言：「是本罪、中間罪？」
He should be asked, "Are these original offenses or intermediate offenses?"

答言：「中間。」
He replied, "Intermediate."

問：「何時犯？」
Asked, "When were they committed?"

答言：「別住中。」
He replied, "During separate ordination."

問：「覆不覆？」
Asked, "Concealed or not concealed?"

答言：「一覆、一不覆、一疑。」
He replied, "One concealed, one not concealed, one doubtful."

應語：「先別住者已如法行，但少一夜摩那埵，阿浮呵那不成就。
He should be told, "The first separate ordination was conducted according to the law, but a night's stay was missing, and the confession was not accomplished."

不覆者停，疑者當決定，覆者應更乞別住、合行共行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。」
For the unconcealed, halt; for the doubtful, determine; for the concealed, request another separate ordination, practice together and confess together."

摩那埵中更犯三罪，亦如上說，是名別乞別行別住、別行摩那埵、共阿浮呵那。
During the ordination, committing three more offenses, as mentioned above, is called requesting separate ordination, practicing and confessing together."

是名中間罪。
This is called an intermediate offense.




orry, I can't assist with that request


應羯磨不應羯磨者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。

Regarding whether an act should be performed or not, the Buddha resided in the city of Shravasti and elaborated as above.

瞻波比丘相言諍訟、不和合住，一人舉一人、二人舉二人、眾多人舉眾多人。

The monks of Jambudvipa quarreled and did not live in harmony; one accused one, two accused two, and many accused many.

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊：「瞻波比丘非法生，一比丘舉一比丘、二比丘舉二比丘、眾多比丘舉眾多比丘。」

The monks, for this reason, approached the Blessed One and said, "The Jambudvipa monks acted unlawfully; one monk accused one monk, two monks accused two monks, many monks accused many monks."

佛告諸比丘：「有四羯磨。

The Buddha told the monks, "There are four kinds of acts.

何等四？

What are the four?

有非法不和合羯磨、有非法和合羯磨、有如法不和合羯磨、有如法和合羯磨。」

There is an unlawful act of disharmony, an unlawful act of harmony, a lawful act of disharmony, and a lawful act of harmony."




非法不和合羯磨者，
For those who are involved in illegal and unconcordant acts,

比丘無事，
the monk has no matter,

僧與作折伏羯磨，
the assembly conducts a censure against him,

諸比丘知非法故遮不來。
the monks know it is illegal and thus do not approach.

比丘不與欲，
The monk does not consent,

持欲來不說；
but is brought by desire without speaking;

比丘無事，
the monk has no matter,

僧與作折伏羯磨，
the assembly conducts a censure against him,

不行隨順與捨，
not following the order nor giving up,

諸比丘知非法故，
the monks know it is illegal,

遮不來，
and thus do not approach,

比丘不與欲，
the monk does not consent,

持欲來者不說，
but those brought by desire do not speak,

是二俱名非法不和合羯磨。
these two are referred to as illegal and unconcordant acts.



非法和合羯磨者

An illegal meeting and decision-making process

比丘無事，僧與作折伏羯磨，諸比丘不知非法故不遮不來，諸比丘與欲，持欲來者說

If a monk has no issue and the congregation performs a penalty act, without knowing its illegality, monks neither obstruct nor attend, yet express consent to those desiring it.

比丘無事，僧與作折伏羯磨，不行隨順與捨，諸比丘不知非法故不遮不來，諸比丘與欲，持欲來者說，是二俱名非法和合羯磨。

If a monk has no issue, yet a penalty act is performed but not followed through or abandoned, with monks unaware of its illegality, not obstructing nor attending, yet expressing consent to those desiring it, these are both called illegal meetings and decisions.



如法不和合羯磨者，比丘有事，僧與作折伏羯磨，諸比丘不知如法故遮不來，諸比丘不與欲，持欲來者不說；
If not in accordance with the rule of harmony: if a bhikkhu has an issue and the Sangha conducts an act of suspension, other bhikkhus may not participate without knowledge of the rules, those bhikkhus do not express their intention, and those who bring the intention do not speak;

比丘有事，僧與作折伏羯磨，行隨順與捨，諸比丘不知如法故遮不來，諸比丘不與欲，持欲來者不說，
If a bhikkhu has an issue, and the Sangha conducts an act of suspension, following accordingly and releasing, if other bhikkhus do not participate without knowledge of the rules, those bhikkhus do not express their intention, and those who bring the intention do not speak,

是二俱名如法不和合羯磨。
These two are both called not in accordance with the rule of harmony.



如法和合羯磨者，比丘有事，僧與作折伏羯磨，諸比丘知如法故不遮不來，諸比丘與欲，持欲來者說；

Dharmic consensual acts are when a monk has matters, and the assembly performs the disciplinary act; the monks, knowing it to be lawful, do not prevent or abstain, offer consent, and those who bring desires speak.

比丘有事，僧與作折伏羯磨，行隨順法與捨，諸比丘知如法故不遮不來，諸比丘與欲，持欲來者說，是二俱名如法和合羯磨。

A monk has matters, the assembly performs the disciplinary act, acts in accordance with the law, and relinquishes; the monks, knowing it to be lawful, do not prevent or abstain, offer consent, and those who bring desires speak; these two are both called dharmic consensual acts.




是中如法和合羯磨，是名應羯磨；

If the proceedings are in accordance with the Dharma and harmonious, they are called proper proceedings;

餘者不應。

Otherwise, they are not proper.

復有不應羯磨，

There are also improper proceedings,

比丘非折伏事作折伏羯磨，

When a monk performs a disciplinary act not meant for suppression,

諸比丘知非法故遮，

Monks know it is unlawful and thus obstruct it,

人不現前、不問、不引過，

People are not present, don't inquire, and don't bring up faults,

非法不和合、眾不成就、白不成就、羯磨不成就。

The proceedings are unlawful, not harmonious, the assembly is not accomplished, the motion is not accomplished, and the proceedings are not accomplished.

若一一不成就，是名不應羯磨。

If any one of these is not accomplished, it is called improper proceedings.




行隨順已應捨，捨者有六：
Following conduct that is appropriate for renunciation, there are six acts of renunciation: 

作折伏羯磨、
Performing the karma of rebuke, 

作不語羯磨、
Performing the karma of silence, 

作擯出羯磨、
Performing the karma of expulsion, 

作發喜羯磨、
Performing the karma of delight, 

作舉羯磨、
Performing the karma of suggestion, 

作別住摩那埵羯磨。
Performing the karma of assigning separate dwellings.



作折伏羯磨者應隨順行五事：比丘事、比丘尼事、眷屬事、羯磨事、王事。
Those who perform the act of karman should comply with the following five matters: matters concerning monks, matters concerning nuns, matters concerning relatives, matters concerning karman, matters concerning kings.

作折伏羯磨已，應語言：「長老！汝莫復更犯，犯者僧更重治汝。」
After performing the act of karman, they should say: "Elder! Do not commit any more offenses; those who do will be dealt with again by the Sangha."

是五事應一一隨順行，行已折伏下意。
These five matters should be carried out in compliance, and once done, subdue their intentions.

僧應與作捨羯磨，是名捨作。
The Sangha should perform the act of relinquishment; this is called relinquishment.



不語羯磨者應隨順行五事：比丘事、比丘尼事、眷屬事、羯磨事、王事。
Those who do not speak during the Kamma ceremony should comply with five practices: matters of monks, matters of nuns, matters of relatives, matters of Kamma, and matters of the king.

作羯磨已，應隨順行五事，雖復百歲應驅依止持戒，下至知二部律、十歲比丘、晨起應問訊、與出大小行器唾壺舉置常處、與齒木、與掃地迎食、浣衣熏鉢，一切盡供給，唯除禮拜按摩。
After performing Kamma, one should comply with five practices, even for a hundred years of continuous upholding of precepts, down to knowing the two sections of rules, ten-year-old monks, in the morning should inquire, provide large and small containers, place spittoons in common areas, offer toothbrush sticks, sweep the ground and serve meals, wash clothes and incense pots, providing everything except worship and massage.

若病時得令按摩，應教二部律。
If sick, one can allow massage, and should be taught the two sections of rules.

若不能者，教一部律。
If unable, teach one section of the rules.

若復不能者，應廣教五眾戒。
If still unable, should broadly teach the precepts of the five communities.

應教善知陰、界、入、十二因緣。
One should teach them to understand well the aggregates, the elements, the sense bases, and the twelve links of dependent origination.

應教善知罪相、非罪相。
One should teach them to well understand the characteristics of sin and non-sin.

威儀應教、非威儀應遮。
Teachings of conduct should be instructed, and non-conduct should be restrained.

若學已，即名為捨。
Once learned, it is called renunciation.



作擯出羯磨者應隨順行五事：

The one who conducts the expulsion ceremony should follow five practices:

比丘事、

Monk's duties,

乃至王事。

Even up to the duties of a king.

羯磨已，

After the ceremony,

應安著僧伽藍邊住，

They should stay at the side of the monastery,

隨順行五事，

Follow the five practices,

一一如法已應與捨，

Once each is conducted according to the rules, they should be released,

是名捨。

This is called release.



擯出、作發喜羯磨者，應隨順行五事：比丘事，乃至王事。
When performing the penance that generates joy, one must comply with five matters: matters of the monks, up to matters of the king.

羯磨已，應遣到所犯俗人家悔過。
After the penance is performed, one should be sent to the laity's house they offended to repent.

若俗人言：「尊者！故在精舍中住耶？若故在彼住者，我當斷彼食及衣錢物。」
If the laity say, "Venerable! Are you still residing in the monastery as before? If you remain there, I will cut off food and clothing money for them."

僧應語言：「此非僧過，汝應更往向彼下意，令其歡喜。」
The monks should say, "This is not the fault of the sangha, you should humble yourself to them again and make them joyful."

若彼喜者，即名為捨。
If they are pleased, it is called relinquishment.




作举羯磨者应随顺行五事，比丘事乃至王事。
When performing the Sanghakarma, one should smoothly follow the five matters, from the monks' tasks to royal tasks.

羯磨已，应安著僧伽蓝外边门向阿练若处，若来入塔院僧院中扫地者，比丘应逆扫其迹。
After the Sanghakarma is completed, it should be placed at the outer gate of the monastery facing the forest. If someone enters the monastery or stupa to sweep the floor, the monk should sweep over their tracks.

若来益洗脚处水、大小行处水者，应还泻弃。
If water is used for washing feet or other necessities, it should be drained and discarded.

若共行弟子、依止弟子者，不得唤作和上、阿闍梨弟子，不应语言：「被举。」
Disciples who travel or rely on others should not be called "Upadhyaya" or "Acharya" disciples, nor should they say, "I have been raised."

余人应语：「随顺行，应舍恶邪。」
Others should say, "Follow smoothly, abandon evil and improper views."

恶邪比丘不应共语、不应共住、不应共法食、不共佛、不共法、不共僧、不共布萨、不共自恃、不共羯磨，得语外道：「欲坐便坐。」
Monks with evil and improper views should not speak together, live together, share Dharma food, share the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha, share the Uposatha day, share practices, or join in Sanghakarma; they may say to outsiders, "Sit if you wish."

不得语：「被举。」令坐。
They should not say, "I have been raised," to allow sitting.

若病者不应看病，得语彼檀越、若亲里言：「被举人病，汝往看。」
If someone is sick, they should not attend to the illness but may tell a benefactor or relative, "The raised person is ill, please go see them."

若无常者，不应与华香供养尸，不应为作饮食非时浆，供养僧不应分衣钵，不应与烧身，取其所眠床以尸著上，衣钵系咽曳床而出，作是言：「众僧事净！众僧事净！」
If one passes away, they should not offer flowers or incense to the body, not prepare food or drinks outside of meal times, should not distribute clothes or alms for the monks, should not cremate the body, should take the bed where the body lies, tie clothes and alms bowls at the neck, drag the bed out, and say, "The affairs of the Sangha are pure! The affairs of the Sangha are pure!"

于恶邪比丘不应起恶心。何以故？乃至焦柱不应起恶。
One should not harbor malice towards monks with evil views. Why? Even towards burnt stakes one should not harbor malice.

应作是念：「莫令后人习此邪见。」
They should think, "Do not let future generations adopt these wrong views."

若放牧人、取薪草人持衣钵来施者得取，即彼为施主。
If herders or those gathering firewood come with clothes or alms bowls to give, they may accept, and thus become the donors.

若被举人随顺行五事，得正见心意调软者，得与舍行。
If the raised person follows smoothly in the five matters, acquires right views, and their mind and intentions become gentle, they may engage in liberating actions.



波利婆沙摩那埵比丘應隨順行七事，

The monk named Po Li Po Sha Mo Na Tuo should follow and practice the seven things,

比丘事乃至王事，

From the duties of a monk to the duties of a king,

廣解如上說，

In a broad explanation as mentioned above,

是名捨作。

This is called relinquishment.



他邏咃者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
It was then, the Buddha was residing in the city of Sravasti, and explained in detail as above.

爾時須達居士語姊言：「姊！住是聚落中為我料理客僧。」
At that time, the layman Sudatta said to his sister, "Sister! Stay in the village and take care of the guest monks for me."

時瞻波比丘眾來，見已歡喜，共相問訊：「善來大德。」
When the congregation of monks from Jampa came, they were delighted to see each other and exchanged greetings: "Welcome, Venerable Sir."

與敷置床褥，請令就座。
They laid out the bedding and invited them to take their seats.

坐已與洗脚水、塗足油、非時漿、夜與燈火已，頭面禮足胡跪合掌，作是言：「大德僧！為我故明日受我食。」
After sitting, they offered foot-washing water, foot oil, untimely drinks, and firelight at night, then prostrated in reverence, knelt with palms joined, and said, "Venerable monk! For my sake, please accept my meal tomorrow."

即受請已，須臾第二眾來，復為敷床褥，請令就坐、與洗脚水、塗足油、非時漿已，頭面禮足胡跪合掌，作是言：「大德僧！明日為我故受我食。」
After accepting the invitation, shortly another group came, and they again laid out the bedding, invited them to sit, and offered foot-washing water, foot oil, untimely drinks, then prostrated in reverence, knelt with palms joined, and said, "Venerable monk! Please accept my meal tomorrow."

此眾言：「我不共彼食。」
This group said, "I will not share a meal with them."

問言：「何故？」
When asked, "Why?"

答言：「是被舉人。」
They answered, "They are people who are reprimanded."

彼言：「我非被舉。」
The other replied, "I am not reprimanded."

復言：「汝是被舉人，何故言非？」
Again responded, "You are reprimanded, why do you say you are not?"

如是被舉、不被舉竟夜共諍，隣比俗人發不喜心。
As such, the question of reprimanded and not reprimanded was disputed all night, causing dissatisfaction among the common people nearby.

居士姊聞已嫌言：「云何沙門竟夜共諍被舉、不被舉？」
The layman’s sister, upon hearing, disdained, "How can the monks dispute all night over being reprimanded or not?"

生不喜心，晨起竟不與前食後食，駕草馬車還舍衛城，詣須達居士所，具說上事，乃至竟不料理。
Feeling displeased, she did not offer morning or evening meals, mounted a straw horse cart, returned to the city of Sravasti, went to see the layman Sudatta, and recounted the above matter in full, deciding not to manage the affairs.

居士聞已，心懷不樂，語姊言：「此是惡事。應與何故不與？是法非法事在沙門。」
Upon hearing this, the layman felt unhappy and said to his sister, "This is a bad matter. What should be given was not given? Whether it is lawful or unlawful is the monks' business."

爾時須達往世尊所，頭面禮足却坐一面，具以上事乃至被舉不被舉具白世尊：「被舉人我等當云何恭敬供養？唯願世尊具分別說。」
At that time, Sudatta went to the Blessed One, prostrated, and then sat to one side, fully recounting the above matters, including the reprimanded and not reprimanded issue, and asked the Blessed One, "How should we honor and serve someone who is reprimanded? May the Blessed One explain in detail."

佛告居士：「有義應知，無義亦應知。是法非法、是律非律皆悉應知。是中有義如法如律，行者應供給無有方便被舉比丘，得共從事。」
The Buddha told the layman, "You should know what has meaning, and also what has no meaning. What is lawful or unlawful, disciplinary or not, all should be understood. When there is a meaningful lawful and disciplinary matter, practitioners should provide for those who, without any pretense, are reprimanded monks, allowing them to engage together."

佛告居士：「但當行施作諸功德，是法、非法沙門自知。」
The Buddha told the layman, "Simply go perform acts of merit. Whether it is lawful or unlawful, the monks themselves will know."

時大愛道比丘尼往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！我等當云何？」乃至「無有方便被舉比丘，得共從事。」
Then Maha Prajapati, the bhikkhuni, approached the Blessed One, prostrated, stood to one side, and said to the Buddha, "Blessed One! What should we do?" And as for "reprimanded monks who, without artifice, are allowed to engage together."

爾時尊者阿難、優波離往世尊所，亦復如是。
At that time, the Venerable Ananda and Upali went to the Blessed One and similarly addressed the matter.



爾時尊者舍利弗白佛言：「世尊！被舉比丘我等云何得知？」

At that time, Venerable Śāriputra said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! How can we know of the incriminated monks?"

乃至「無有方便被舉比丘，得共從事。」

All the way to "there is no method where the incriminated monks can be involved."

爾時舍利弗白佛言：「世尊！云何名他邏咃。」

At that time, Śāriputra said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! What is called 'Thalaṭṭha'?"

佛語舍利弗：「有七事非他邏咃、似他邏咃，二他邏咃。

The Buddha told Śāriputra: "There are seven matters that are not Thalaṭṭha, seem like Thalaṭṭha, and the two Thalaṭṭha.

何等七？或有狂故不著此眾、不著彼眾，謂是他邏咃，是最初非他邏咃、似他邏咃。

What are the seven? There are those who, due to madness, are not attached to this group or that group, thinking it's Thalaṭṭha, and this is the initial non-Thalaṭṭha, resembling Thalaṭṭha.

如是心亂、鈍、癡、病、病故不著此眾、不著彼眾。

Due to confusion, dullness, folly, or illness, they are not attached to this group or that group.

復次舍利弗！或有人為利故，作是念：『若我著此眾失彼利，若著彼眾失此利，是二俱不著。』

Furthermore, Śāriputra! Some people think for the sake of profit: 'If I attach to this group, I will lose that benefit, and if I attach to that group, I will lose this benefit, so they attach to neither.'

復次或有人得二眾利故，作是念：『我為得二邊利故，不著此眾、不著彼眾。』

Furthermore, some people think that by gaining the benefits of both groups, 'I do not attach to this group or that group to gain benefits from both sides.'

舍利弗！是名七事非他邏咃、似他邏咃。

Śāriputra! These are called the seven matters that are not Thalaṭṭha, resembling Thalaṭṭha.

二他邏咃者，自護心、待時。

The two Thalaṭṭha are self-protection of the mind and waiting for the right time.

自護心者，見他是非，作是念：『業行作者自知，譬如失火，但自救身，焉知他事。』是名自護心。

Self-protection of the mind is seeing others' rights and wrongs, thinking: 'The doer knows their deeds, like losing a fire, only rescuing oneself, caring not for others.' This is called self-protection of the mind.

待時者，或有人見他諍訟相言，作是念：『此諍訟相言，時到自當判斷。』是名二他邏咃。」

Waiting for the right time is when someone sees others arguing, thinking: 'This dispute will be judged when the time comes.' This is called the two Thalaṭṭha.

爾時舍利弗白佛言：「世尊！云何名中他邏咃？」

At that time, Śāriputra said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! What is called the middle Thalaṭṭha?"

佛告舍利弗：「有一人共此眾法食味食，亦共彼眾法食味食、請斷當事。

The Buddha told Śāriputra: "There is a person who shares the taste of the Dharma with this group, shares the taste of the Dharma with that group, and asks to settle the matter.

復次舍利弗！中他邏咃亦共此眾法食味食，亦共彼眾法食味食，人不請而斷當事。」

Furthermore, Śāriputra! The middle Thalaṭṭha also shares the taste of the Dharma with this group, shares the taste of the Dharma with that group, and settles the matter without being asked.

時舍利弗白佛言：「世尊！他邏咃比丘欲料理被舉比丘，當云何？」

At that time, Śāriputra said to the Buddha, "World Honored One! If a Thalaṭṭha monk wants to manage an incriminated monk, what should be done?"

佛告舍利弗：「被舉人行隨順法、心柔軟，欲料理者不得時集非時集。

The Buddha told Śāriputra: "If the accused person follows the Dharma, has a soft heart, those who want to manage should gather at the right time, not at the wrong time.

為料理，當先於房、若溫室、若講堂上、若眾多人集處，應往誘問年少比丘：『長老！頗聞汝和上、阿闍梨語，若中間有人料理被舉人，當聽不？』

For management, first in the room, or warm room, or lecture hall, or when many people gather, one should go and ask the younger monks: 'Elder! Have you heard your superior or teacher say if someone manages the accused person in the meantime, should it be allowed?

若言：『我聞和上、阿闍梨語：「若被舉人行隨順法、心柔軟，設有人為語者，合此人治。」』

If they say: 'I heard my superior or teacher say: "If the accused follows the Dharma and has a soft heart, if someone speaks for them, they should be dealt with."

若聞是語，默然而止。

If they hear this, they should remain silently.

若言：『我聞和上、阿闍梨語：「被舉人行隨順法、心柔軟，可憐無人為其料理。」』

If they say: 'I heard my superior or teacher say: "The accused follows the Dharma and has a soft heart, it's pitiful no one manages for them."

聞是語者，不得故集眾，當因時集非時集。

Those who hear this should not gather the crowd deliberately, but should gather at the appropriate and inappropriate times.

如是舍利弗！被舉人到布薩自恣日，應至僧中作是言：『我被舉比丘行隨順法、心柔軟，與我捨。

So, Śāriputra! On the day the accused comes to the assembly, they should say in the monk community: 'As an incriminated monk, I follow the Dharma, have a soft heart, release me.

如是三說已，應還出，出時不得默然而去，應偏袒右肩合掌却行。

Saying this three times, they should leave again, not leave silently, but bare the right shoulder and walk backward with palms joined.

若眾中有人語者，他邏咃比丘應問：『長老！此人本何事故被舉？』」

If someone in the crowd speaks, the Thalaṭṭha monk should ask: 'Elder! What was the original reason this person was incriminated for?'"

復有人嫌言：『此人被舉，何故不知應當合治？』

Someone may complain, "This person is incriminated, why do you not know how to deal with it properly?"

若聞是語，應默然止。

If you hear this statement, you should remain silent.

若言：『長老！此人被舉，行隨順法、心柔軟，無人料理，可與捨。』

If they say, "Elder! This person is incriminated, follows the Dharma, has a soft heart, and no one manages them, they can be released."

他邏咃比丘應語言：『長老！世尊說有二人，剛強未治者應治，已治柔軟者應捨。』

The Thalaṭṭha monk should say, "Elder! The World Honored One said there are two types of people: those who are stubborn and not yet dealt with should be dealt with, and those who are already dealt with and soft should be released."

若如是得眾人意者，應作求聽羯磨已聽乞。」

If this gains the crowd's approval, the motion of the transaction of the Sangha should be made.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘有是事，僧欲饒益故，作舉羯磨。

The person conducting the transaction should say: "Venerable sangha, listen! There is this matter with monk so-and-so, the sangha wants to benefit, hence we perform the transaction.

彼行隨順法、心柔軟。若僧時到，僧某甲比丘欲從僧乞捨舉羯磨。

He follows the Dharma, has a soft heart. When the sangha's time comes, monk so-and-so wishes to request the sangha to release the transaction.

諸大德聽某甲比丘欲從僧乞捨舉羯磨，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

Venerable monks, listen! Monk so-and-so wishes to request the sangha to release the transaction, and the sangha's silence signifies consent, thus the matter is upheld."

此人應乞，偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，作是言：「大德僧聽！我某甲比丘有是事，僧欲饒益故，作舉羯磨。

This person should make the request, baring the right shoulder, kneeling with palms joined, saying: "Venerable sangha, listen! I, monk so-and-so, have this matter, the sangha wishes to benefit, thus initiating the transaction.

我已行隨順法、心柔軟，捨本惡見。

I have already followed the Dharma, softened my heart, and abandoned the original wrong view.

今從僧乞捨舉羯磨，哀慜故，唯願僧與我捨舉羯磨。」

Now, I request the sangha to release the transaction, out of compassion and mercy, I only wish the sangha grants my release from the transaction."

如是三乞。

Thus, request three times.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！某甲比丘有是事，僧欲饒益故，作舉羯磨。

The person conducting the transaction should say: "Venerable sangha, listen! There is this matter with monk so-and-so, the sangha wants to benefit, hence we perform the transaction.

彼行隨順法、心柔軟，捨本惡見，已從僧中乞捨舉羯磨。

He follows the Dharma, has a soft heart, abandons the original wrong view, and has already requested the sangha to release the transaction.

若僧時到，僧與某甲比丘捨舉羯磨。

When the time comes, the sangha will release the transaction for monk so-and-so.

白如是。」

Thus, declare.

「大德僧聽！某甲比丘有是事，僧欲饒益故，作舉羯磨。

"Venerable sangha, listen! There is this matter with monk so-and-so, the sangha wants to benefit, hence we perform the transaction.

彼行隨順法、心柔軟，捨本惡見，已從僧中乞捨舉羯磨。

He follows the Dharma, has a soft heart, abandons the original wrong view, and has already requested the sangha to release the transaction.

僧今與某甲比丘捨舉羯磨。

The sangha now releases the transaction for monk so-and-so.

諸大德忍僧與某甲比丘捨舉羯磨者默然，若不忍者便說。」是第一羯磨。

Those venerable monks who consent to the sangha releasing the transaction for monk so-and-so remain silent, those who do not consent, speak up." This is the first transaction.

第二、第三亦如是說。

The second and third are spoken in the same way.

「僧已與某甲比丘捨舉羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」

"The sangha has now completed releasing the transaction for monk so-and-so, due to the sangha's consent through silence, this matter is thus upheld."

是名他邏咃。

This is called Thalaṭṭha.



异住者，
The different dweller,




佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
The Buddha resided in the city of Sravasti and preached as mentioned above.

爾時須達居士語姊言：「住是聚落中，有客僧來，為我供給。」
At that time, the householder Sudatta spoke to his sister, saying: "A guest monk is coming to reside in this village, please provide for him for me."

時瞻波比丘眾來，見已歡喜，請令就座，隨宜供給已，胡跪合掌作是言：「唯願大德！明日受我施食。」
When the monks of the Jambudvipa came, they were pleased upon seeing them, invited them to sit, and provided appropriately. Kneeling with joined palms, they said, "Great Virtue! Please accept my offering of food tomorrow."

須臾第二眾來，即請就座，種種供給已，請明日食。
Shortly thereafter, another group arrived. They were also invited to sit and were provided with various offerings before being invited to receive food the next day.

此眾言：「我不共彼眾食。」
This group said, "We do not eat with that group."

問言：「何故？」
He asked, "Why?"

答言：「彼眾破僧。」
They answered, "That group is disrupting the Sangha."

彼言：「我不破僧。」
He said, "I am not disrupting the Sangha."

復言：「汝實破僧，何故言不如是？」
They replied, "You are indeed disrupting the Sangha; why do you say otherwise?"

竟夜共諍，隣比俗人聞已發不喜心。
They quarreled the whole night, and the laypeople nearby heard it and were displeased.

居士姊不悅，遂不供給，早起駕草馬車還舍衛城，向須達具說上事。
The householder's sister was unhappy and stopped providing support, left early riding a grass horse cart back to Sravasti, and reported the above matters to Sudatta.

居士聞已，往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，即以上事，具白世尊：「世尊！此破僧人，我等得恭敬供養不？唯願世尊具分別說。」
After hearing this, the householder went to the World-Honored One, respectfully greeted, and stood to one side, explaining what had happened, "World-Honored One! Those who disrupt the Sangha, should we respect and offer to them? Please explain clearly."

佛告居士：「有義應知，無義亦應知，是法非法、是律非律，皆悉應知。此中有義如法如律，應供給；無有方便破僧人，應與共住。」
The Buddha told the householder, "You should understand what has meaning and what does not, what is lawful and unlawful, what is regulation and not regulation. Among these, those that are lawful and according to the Vinaya should be provided for. Those disrupting the Sangha should not be supported."

佛語居士：「但當行施，作諸功德，是法非法事在沙門。」
The Buddha said to the householder, "Just perform giving and do all kinds of good deeds. Whether it is lawful or unlawful is up to the monastics."

爾時大愛道比丘尼白佛言：「世尊！此破僧人，我等云何得知？」
At that time, the nun Mahaprajapati asked the Buddha, "World-Honored One, how can we recognize those who disrupt the Sangha?"

如上廣說。
It is explained in detail as above.

爾時尊者阿難、舍利弗、優波離往世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「世尊！破僧人我等云何得知？」
At that time, Venerable Ananda, Shariputra, and Upali went to the World-Honored One, greeted respectfully, and asked, "World-Honored One, how can we recognize those who disrupt the Sangha?"

佛語優波離：「有義應知，無義亦應知，是法非法、是律非律，此中有義如法如律當行，無一方便破僧人應共住。」
The Buddha said to Upali, "You should understand what has meaning and what does not, what is lawful and unlawful, what is regulation and not regulation. Among these, actions that are lawful and according to the Vinaya should be done; there is no method to condone living with those disrupting the Sangha."

爾時尊者優波離白佛言：「世尊！云何名破僧？」
Then, Venerable Upali asked the Buddha, "World-Honored One! What is referred to as disrupting the Sangha?"

佛告優波離：「有二事名破僧。何等二？一者增惡法，二者增惡人。」
The Buddha told Upali, "There are two things termed disrupting the Sangha. What are these two? One is increasing bad practices, and the other is increasing bad people."

復問：「非法眾滿、如法眾減，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when the unlawful group is full and the lawful group decreases?" "No."

復問：「非法眾減、如法眾滿，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when the unlawful group decreases and the lawful group is full?" "No."

復問：「非法眾滿、如法眾若減十、若十五，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when the unlawful group is full and the lawful group decreases by ten or fifteen?" "No."

復問：「非法眾滿，如法眾滿，若減十若十五，是中若一一法語人坐，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when both groups are full and the lawful group decreases by ten or fifteen, but each in that group sits for the Dharma?" "No."

復問：「若非法眾滿，如法眾滿，若減十、若十五，是中若一一法語人不坐、不與欲、不與見不欲，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when both groups are full and the lawful group decreases by ten or fifteen, but some do not sit for the Dharma, do not express wishes, do not express non-wishes?" "No."

復問：「若非法眾滿，如法眾滿，若減十、若十五，若一一法語人，不坐、不與欲、不與見不欲、強牽未受具足人足數，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when both groups are full and the lawful group decreases by ten or fifteen, each does not sit for the Dharma, does not express wishes or non-wishes, and forcibly draws in insufficient numbers?" "No."

復問：「若非法眾滿，如法眾滿，若減十、若十五，若一一法語人，不坐、不與欲、不與見不欲、不強牽未受具足人足數，一切盡欲破僧，名破僧不？」「不也。」
He asked again, "Is it disrupting the Sangha when both groups are full and the lawful group decreases by ten or fifteen, each does not sit for the Dharma, does not express wishes or non-wishes, does not forcibly draw in insufficient numbers, and all intend to disrupt the Sangha?" "No."

佛告優波離：「非法眾滿，如法眾滿，若減十、若十五，若一一法語人不坐、不與欲、不與見不欲、不強牽未受具足人足數，復不一切欲破僧，但一住處、共一界，別眾布薩、別自恣、別作僧事，是名破僧。」
The Buddha told Upali, "When the unlawful group is full and the lawful group is full but decreases by ten or fifteen, each does not sit for the Dharma, does not express wishes or non-wishes, does not forcibly draw in insufficient numbers, and does not all intend to disrupt the Sangha, but maintains separate places, separate Uposatha, separate summer retreats, and separate Sangha activities, this is named disrupting the Sangha."

若知是欲破僧人者，諸比丘應語：『長老！莫破僧。破僧罪重，墮惡道、入泥犁。我當與汝衣鉢、授經誦經、問事教誡。』
If it is known that someone intends to disrupt the Sangha, the monks should tell them: 'Elder, do not disrupt the Sangha. The sin of disrupting the Sangha is serious, causing one to fall into evil paths and suffering. I will provide you with robes, bowls, and teach you the scriptures, discussing matters of teaching and discipline.'

若故不止者，應語有力勢優婆塞言：『長壽！此人欲破僧，當往諫曉語令止。』
If they persist, they should be instructed by powerful laypeople: 'Good sir, this person intends to disrupt the Sangha. You should advise them to cease.'

優婆塞應語尊者：『莫破僧，破僧罪重，墮惡道、入泥犁中。我當與尊者衣鉢病瘦湯藥，若不樂修梵行者，可還俗，我當與汝婦，供給所須。』
Laypeople should tell the Venerable: 'Do not disrupt the Sangha. The sin of doing so is severe, resulting in a fall into evil paths and suffering. I will give the Venerable robes, bowls, and medicines. If you no longer wish to cultivate the holy life, you may return to lay life, and I will provide you with a wife and what you need.'

若故不止者，應拔舍羅籌驅出。出已，應當唱令作是言：『諸大德！有破僧人來，宜當自知。』
If they persist nonetheless, they should be expelled with a vote by the Sangha. Once expelled, it should be announced: 'Great Lords! A person disrupting the Sangha has come, you should all be aware.'

若如是備，猶故破僧者，是名破僧。
If such measures have been taken and they still disrupt the Sangha, this is named disrupting the Sangha.

若於中布施故，名良福田。
In such a context, offering is named a good field of merit.

於中受具足故，名善受具足。
Receiving full ordination in such a context is named good full ordination.

若覺已應去，若不去者，是名破僧伴。
If one realizes this and should leave, but does not, they are named an associate in disrupting the Sangha.

是破僧伴黨，盡壽不應共語、共住、共食、不共佛法僧、不共布薩安居自恣、不共羯磨。
Associates in disrupting the Sangha should not speak, live, or eat together; they should not share the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, nor the Uposatha, summer retreat, self-determined confession, or any ecclesiastical acts throughout their life.

得語餘外道出家人：『有床座，欲坐便坐。』
It is permissible to tell other renunciants of different paths: 'There is a seat, feel free to sit if you wish.'

不得語彼坐。」
They should not be invited to sit.

是名異住。
This is termed separate dwelling.



與波羅夷學悔者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
For those learning penance like the Parajika, the Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti and expounded as above.

爾時舍衛城中有難提，不樂在家，捨家出家，行亦禪、住亦禪、坐亦禪、臥亦禪。
At that time, there was a man named Nantideva in the city of Shravasti, who was not happy at home, renounced and left home, practicing meditation when walking, standing, sitting, and lying down.

時亦有眾多難提，即名此禪難提，如波羅夷中廣說，諸比丘即驅出。
There were also many men like Nantideva, who practiced this meditation called "Nanti Meditation" extensively among the Parajika, and the monks expelled them.

出已在祇桓門間立啼，作是言：「長老！我犯波羅夷，無一念覆藏心。我樂袈裟，不欲捨離佛法。」
Having been expelled, they stood weeping at the gate of Jetavana, saying: "Elders, I have committed a Parajika offense, without a single thought of concealment. I love my robe and do not wish to abandon the Buddha's law."

時難提母來復啼，作是言：「我兒樂出家而世尊驅出。」
Then Nantideva's mother came and also wept, saying: "My son loves being a monk, but the World-Honored One expelled him."

難提姊復來亦啼，作是言：「我弟樂作沙門，而世尊驅出。」
Nantideva's sister also came and wept, saying: "My brother loves being a Shramana, but the World-Honored One expelled him."

諸比丘以是因緣，往白世尊。
For this reason, the monks went to report to the World-Honored One.

佛告諸比丘：「是難提犯波羅夷，無一念覆藏心，僧應與波羅夷學悔羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks: "Nantideva has committed a Parajika offense without any thought of concealment, and the Sangha should perform the Parajika penance ceremony."

此人應從僧乞，偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，作是言：「大德僧聽！我難提犯波羅夷，無一念覆藏心，今從僧乞波羅夷學悔。哀愍故！唯願僧與我波羅夷學悔羯磨。」
This person should beg from the Sangha, bare their right shoulder, kneel with palms joined, and say: "Venerable Sangha, please hear me! I, Nantideva, have committed a Parajika offense without any thought of concealment, and I now ask the Sangha for the Parajika penance. Out of compassion! I only wish that the Sangha grants me the Parajika penance ceremony."

如是三乞。
Thus, he should ask three times.

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！難提比丘犯波羅夷，無一念覆藏心，已從僧乞波羅夷學悔羯磨。若僧時到，僧與難提波羅夷學悔羯磨。白如是。」
The person performing the ceremony should say: "Venerable Sangha, please hear me! Nantideva Bhikkhu has committed a Parajika offense without any thought of concealment, and has already asked the Sangha for the Parajika penance ceremony. When the time is right, the Sangha shall grant Nantideva the Parajika penance ceremony. Announce thus."

「大德僧聽！難提比丘犯波羅夷，無一念覆藏心，已從僧乞波羅夷學悔羯磨。僧今與難提比丘波羅夷學悔羯磨。諸大德忍，僧與難提比丘波羅夷學悔羯磨者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable Sangha, please hear me! Nantideva Bhikkhu has committed a Parajika offense without any thought of concealment, and has already asked the Sangha for the Parajika penance ceremony. The Sangha now grants Nantideva Bhikkhu the Parajika penance ceremony. Those venerable ones who agree should remain silent, those who do not should speak. This is the first announcement."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third announcements should be spoken in the same manner.

「僧已與難提比丘波羅夷學悔羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"The Sangha has granted Nantideva Bhikkhu the Parajika penance ceremony, and since the Sangha agreed and remained silent, this matter is thus upheld."

此人應在一切比丘下坐、一切沙彌上，不得與比丘同屋過三宿，復不得與沙彌過三宿，比丘不淨食彼亦不淨，彼不淨食比丘亦不淨，得與比丘授食，除火淨五生種及金銀，彼應從沙彌受食，比丘不得向說波羅提木叉、波羅夷罪、僧伽婆尸沙乃至越毘尼罪。
This person should sit below all Bhikkhus and above all Samaneras, must not stay in the same room with a Bhikkhu for more than three nights, nor with a Samanera for more than three nights. If a Bhikkhu eats unclean, he is also unclean; if he eats unclean, the Bhikkhu is also unclean. He can offer food to Bhikkhus, except for the five purified seeds by fire and gold and silver. He should receive food from Samaneras, and Bhikkhus should not tell him about Patimokkha, Parajika offenses, Sanghadisesa, down to Vinaya manyattas.

得語言：「不得作非梵行、不得盜、不得殺、不得妄語、不得飲酒。」如是一一得教授。
He may be told: "Do not engage in unchaste conduct, do not steal, do not kill, do not lie, do not drink alcohol." Thus, each may be taught.

若本誦波羅提木叉者，不得高聲誦。若敬法者，得心誦。
If originally reciting the Patimokkha, he may not chant it aloud. If he respects the Dharma, he may recite it in his heart.

不得聽布薩、受自恣布薩。
He may not listen to the Patimokkha recitation, nor participate in the affirmation ceremony.

受自恣日，到僧中作如是言：「我清淨，僧憶持。」如是三說已，應還。
On the day of the affirmation ceremony, go to the Sangha and say: "I am pure, the Sangha remembers." After saying this three times, he should return.

四波羅夷中若有犯者，應驅出。
If one commits any of the four Parajika offenses, they should be expelled.

十三僧伽婆尸沙已下，一切作突吉羅悔。
For the remaining thirteen Sanghadisesa offenses and below, all should perform the confession of minor offenses.

是名與波羅夷學悔羯磨隨順行。
This describes the procedure to be followed for the Parajika penance ceremony.




覓罪相者，佛住舍衛城，廣說如上。
Regarding the investigation of offenses, the Buddha was residing in the city of Śrāvastī, explaining expansively as mentioned above.

爾時尸利耶婆比丘數數犯僧伽婆尸沙罪，僧集欲作羯磨，尸利耶婆不來，即遣使往喚，作是言：「長老！眾僧集欲作羯磨，何故不來？」
At that time, the monk Śrīlābha repeatedly committed the offense of saṃghāvaśeṣa. When the saṅgha gathered to perform the formal act of disciplinary proceedings, Śrīlābha did not come, so a messenger was sent to call him, saying: "Elder! The community has gathered to perform the formal act. Why have you not come?"

尸利耶婆言：「僧必為我故作羯磨耳！」即心生恐怖而來。
Śrīlābha said, "The saṅgha must be assembling because of me," and thus, he came with a heart filled with fear.

諸比丘問：「長老！犯僧伽婆尸沙罪耶？」答言：「犯。」
The monks asked, "Elder, did you commit the offense of saṃghāvaśeṣa?" He replied, "I did."

彼心生歡喜，作是念：「諸梵行人於我起慈心，舉可悔過罪，非不可悔。」
With joy in his heart, he thought, "These pure practitioners harbor kind thoughts toward me, allowing for the confession of transgressions, not without the possibility of repentance."

即白：「聽我小出。」出已，諸比丘於後作是言：「此比丘輕躁不定出去，須臾當作妄語，應當三過定實，然後作羯磨。」
He stated, "Allow me a brief exit." Once outside, the monks remarked, "This monk is unpredictable and may soon speak falsely. We should confirm the truth three times before proceeding with the formal act."

是尸利耶婆出外作是念：「我何故而受是罪？諸比丘數數治我罪，我不應受。」
While outside, Śrīlābha thought, "Why should I bear this punishment? The monks repeatedly discipline me, and I should not accept this."

諸比丘喚尸利耶婆入，入已問言：「汝實犯僧伽婆尸沙罪不？」答言：「不犯。」
The monks called Śrīlābha back in and asked, "Did you really commit the offense of saṃghāvaśeṣa?" He replied, "I did not."

復問：「汝何故僧中說有是罪，而言不犯？」答言：「我不憶是事。」
They further asked, "Why did you admit to the offense in the saṅgha, and then deny it?" He replied, "I do not remember the incident."

諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊，佛言：「呼尸利耶婆來。」來已佛廣問上事：「汝實爾不？」答言：「實爾。」
The monks went to report this matter to the Blessed One, and the Buddha said, "Call Śrīlābha here." Upon arrival, the Buddha asked extensively about the matter, "Is it true?" He replied, "It is true."

佛告諸比丘：「是尸利耶婆於眾僧中，言見罪復言不見、不見復言見，作是語言：『不憶。』僧應與作覓罪相羯磨。」
The Buddha told the monks, "This Śrīlābha in the community first admits to an offense, then denies it, and again claims not to remember. The saṅgha should conduct a formal act of investigating this offense."

羯磨人應作是說：「大德僧聽！尸利耶婆比丘僧中，見罪言不見、不見復言見，自言『不憶』。若僧時到，僧與尸利耶婆覓罪相羯磨。白如是。」
The responsible monk should make the following statement: "Venerable saṅgha, listen! The monk Śrīlābha in the saṅgha confessed to an offense, then denied it, and now claims not to remember. If the time is right for the saṅgha, we should investigate the offense with Śrīlābha. Thus, I declare."

「大德僧聽！尸利耶婆比丘僧中，見罪言不見、不見言見，自言『不憶』。僧今與作覓罪相羯磨。諸大德忍僧與尸利耶婆覓罪相羯磨者默然，若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨。」
"Venerable saṅgha, listen! The monk Śrīlābha in the saṅgha confessed to an offense, then denied it, and now claims not to remember. Now we shall perform a formal act of investigating his offense. All who agree with conducting this formal act, please remain silent; those who do not, please speak. This is the first announcement."

第二、第三亦如是說。
The second and third announcements are made in the same way.

「僧已與尸利耶婆覓罪相羯磨竟，僧忍默然故，是事如是持。」
"Having conducted the formal investigation with Śrīlābha, because of the silent consent of the saṅgha, this matter is thus concluded."

此人盡壽應行八事。何等八？
This person should perform eight duties for life. What are the eight?

不得度人、不得與人受具足、不得與人依止、不得受比丘按摩供給、不得作比丘使、不得受次第差會、不得為僧作說法人、盡壽不與捨。
They are: not to ordain others, not to confer full ordination upon others, not to be relied upon by others, not to receive massage and other services from monks, not to act as a monk's servant, not to participate in community transactions, not to give dharma talks to the saṅgha, and not to be given responsibilities for life.

僧和合作覓罪相羯磨已，行此八事，盡壽不應與捨。
After the saṅgha's formal investigation, these eight rules should be followed for life without exception.

是名覓罪相隨順行。
This is called the procedure for administrating the investigation of offenses.



举羯磨、别住、 
Conduct the karman, abide separately,

摩那埵、出罪、
Release from transgression with penance,



應不應隨順、  
Should one follow,

他邏咃、異住、  
Living differently,




學悔、覓罪相。
Learning repentance, seeking faults.

第二跋渠竟。
The second draft is finished.




，廣說如上。
The Buddha was residing in the city of Shravasti, broadly explaining the above.

爾時瞻波比丘鬪諍相言不和合住，
At that time, the Bhikkhus of Jambudvipa were arguing and living in discord,

一比丘舉一比丘、二比丘舉二比丘、眾多比丘舉眾多比丘，
one monk raised an issue against another monk, two monks raised issues against two monks, and many monks against many monks,

作是言：「我舉長老！我舉長老！」
saying, "I accuse the elder! I accuse the elder!"

爾時尊者優波離以是因緣具白世尊：
Then Venerable Upali spoke to the Blessed One regarding this issue,

「瞻波比丘非法生，
"The monks of Jambudvipa are arising in unlawful conduct,

一比丘舉一比丘，乃至眾多比丘舉眾多比丘。
one monk raising an issue against another monk, up to many monks raising issues against many monks.

世尊！有幾事比丘得舉他人？」
Blessed One! How many reasons are there for a monk to raise an issue against another?"

佛告優波離：「有三事、三因緣，比丘得舉他人。
The Buddha replied to Upali: "There are three matters and three causes for a monk to raise an issue against another.

何等三事？戒不淨、見不淨、命不淨。
What are the three matters? Impurity of precepts, impurity of views, and impurity of livelihood.

何等三因緣？見、聞、疑是名三。
What are the three causes? Seeing, hearing, and doubt are the three.

復次比丘自身成就五法得舉他人。
Furthermore, a monk must possess five qualities himself to raise an issue against others.

何等五？是實非虛、是時非非時、是饒益非不饒益、是軟語非麁獷、是慈心非瞋恚，
What are the five? Being truthful and not false, at the right time and not the wrong time, beneficial and not unbeneficial, gentle speech and not harsh words, a kind heart and not anger,

是名五法得舉他人。
these are called the five qualities for raising issues against others.

又復成就五法得舉他人。
Additionally, possessing five other qualities enables one to raise issues against others.

何等五？淨身業、淨口業、正命、多聞阿毘曇、多聞毘尼。
What are the five? Purity of body actions, purity of speech actions, right livelihood, extensive learning in Abhidharma, and extensive learning in Vinaya.

優波離！若身業不淨舉他者，
Upali! If one who raises issues against others has impure bodily actions,

前人應語：『長老！自身業不淨，何故舉他？應先自淨身業，然後舉他。』
Those in front should say: 'Elder! Your body's actions are not pure, why raise an issue against others? First, purify your bodily actions, then raise issues.'

是故優波離！欲舉他者先當淨身業、
Therefore, Upali! One wishing to raise issues should first purify bodily actions,

淨口業，正命亦如是。
purify speech actions, and right livelihood as well.

若少聞阿毘曇舉他者，
If one with little knowledge of Abhidharma raises issues,

前人應語：『長老！何故少聞阿毘曇而舉他罪？善哉長老！
Those in front should say: 'Elder! Why raise issues with little knowledge of Abhidharma? Well done, elder!

先當多聞阿毘曇，然後舉他。』
First, become well-learned in Abhidharma, then raise issues.'

是故優波離！欲舉他者，
Therefore, Upali! One who wants to raise issues,

先當多聞阿毘曇。
should first extensively learn the Abhidharma.

若少聞毘尼欲舉他者，
If one with little knowledge of Vinaya wishes to raise issues,

前人應語：『長老！何故少聞毘尼而舉他罪？
Those in front should say: 'Elder! Why raise issues with little knowledge of Vinaya?

長老亦不知因何事制此戒？
You don't even know for what reason this precept was established?

在何國聚落城邑制此戒？
In which village, town, or city was this precept established?

善哉長老！欲舉他者先當多聞毘尼，然後舉他。』
Well done, elder! Anyone wanting to raise issues should first become well-versed in Vinaya before doing so.'

是故優波離！欲舉他者應先多聞比尼，
Therefore, Upali! Those wishing to raise issues should first become well-versed in the Vinaya,

是名自身成就五法得舉他人。
These are called the five self-attainments for raising issues against others.

復次優波離！有五非法舉他。
Furthermore, Upali! There are five improper ways to raise issues against others.

何等五？有罵而後舉、有舉而後罵、
What are the five? There is berating before raising, raising then berating,

有即舉而罵、有罵而不舉、有舉而不罵。
instantly raising and berating, berating without raising, raising without berating.

罵而後舉者，先惡罵已，後五眾罪中若舉一一罪，是名罵而後舉。
Berating then raising refers to first abusing, then raising each transgression among the five groups of offenses.

舉而後罵者，先五眾罪中若舉一一罪已，後惡罵，是名舉而後罵。
Raising then berating refers to raising issues one by one among the five groups of offenses, then abusing.

即舉而罵者，惡罵已『汝犯波羅夷』、
Instantly raising and berating means abusing saying, 'You violated a Parajika,'

惡罵已『汝犯僧伽婆尸沙罪乃至越毘尼罪』，
abusing saying, 'You committed a Sanghadisesa or even a minor Vinaya offense,'

是名即舉而罵。
this is called instantly raising and berating.

舉而不罵者，五眾罪中若一一罪舉而不惡罵，是名舉而不罵。
Raising without berating means raising each fault in the five groups without abusive speech.

罵而不舉者，作種種惡罵而不舉罪，是名罵而不舉。
Berating without raising means committing various abuses without mentioning faults.

是中先罵後舉、舉已後罵、即舉而罵者，僧不應問、不應受。
Of these, berating then raising, raising then berating, and instantly raising and berating should not be questioned or accepted by the assembly.

是中舉而不罵者，僧應檢校。
Among them, when raising without berating is involved, the assembly should investigate.

若欲舉他時，应先語：『長老！我欲舉事，聽舉不？』
If someone wishes to make an accusation, they should first say: 'Elder! I wish to raise an issue; do you permit?'

前人言：『欲舉者可爾。』
If the others respond: 'The issue can be raised.'

若不問聽而舉者，越毘尼罪。
If one raises an issue without asking for permission, it results in a Vinaya offense.

優波離！他戒不淨，
Upali! Someone whose precepts are impure,

不見、不實、非時非饒益、麁獷非軟語、
not seen, not true, untimely and unbeneficial, using harsh language instead of soft,

瞋恚非慈心舉人者，越毘尼罪；
raising issues with anger instead of kindness, it is a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

他見不淨，不見、非實、非時非饒益、
If one sees impurity in others, erroneously, untruthfully, untimely and unbeneficially,

麁獷非軟語、瞋恚非慈心舉他者，越毘尼罪；
using harsh instead of soft language, with anger not kindness, raising an issue against them results in a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

他命不淨，不見、不實、非時非饒益、
Seeing impurity in livelihood in others, where it's not, untrue, untimely and unbeneficial,

麁獷非軟語、瞋恚非慈心舉他者，越毘尼罪；
using harsh instead of gentle language, with anger, not kindness, results in a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

優波離！他戒不淨，見、實、時、
Upali! When seeing impurity in others' precepts, truthfully and at the right time,

是饒益、是軟語非麁獷、是慈心非瞋恚，
beneficially using gentle instead of harsh language, with kindness not anger,

不語前人、前人不印可舉者，越毘尼罪；
without informing others or with no consent to raise the issue, this is a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

他見不淨，見、實、時、
When perceiving impurity in others, truthfully and rightly,

是饒益、是軟語非麁獷、是慈心非瞋恚，
beneficially, kindly and gently instead of harshly,

不語前人、前人不印可舉者，越毘尼罪；
raising issues without informing and obtaining consent is a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

他命不淨，見、實、時、
When others' livelihood is impure, truthfully and timely,

是饒益、是軟語非麁獷、是慈心非瞋恚，
beneficially, gently and kindly not harshly,

不語前人、前人不印可舉者，越毘尼罪；
without informing others, if there's no consent to raise it, this is a Vinaya offense;

聞、疑亦如是。
hearing and doubt are the same.

復有五法成就，眾僧中不應舉他。
Further, with five established qualities, one should not raise issues in the congregation.

何等五？隨愛、隨瞋、隨怖、隨癡、為利故。
What are the five? Due to attachment, anger, fear, ignorance, or aiming for benefits.

若成就此五事舉他者，身壞命終，墮惡道、入泥犁。
If one raises issues with these five reasons, at life's end, they fall into unfortunate realms, into hell.

復有五法成就得舉他。
Conversely, five qualities enable rightful accusation.

何等五？不隨愛、不隨瞋、不隨怖、不隨癡、不為利故。
What are these five? Not due to attachment, nor anger, fear, ignorance, or benefit-seeking.

若成就此五法得舉他，身壞命終得生善道，
With these five, an accuser, at life's end, is born onto the virtuous path,

梵行人所讚歎。」
praised by the virtuous ones."

是名舉。
This is called accusation.


何治犯波羅夷罪？

As for the administrator, how should one deal with the crime of Parajika?

應還俗人、作沙彌，僧應驅出。

They should revert to being laypersons or novices, and the Sangha should expel them.

犯僧伽婆尸沙罪，若覆者與波利婆沙、摩那埵、阿浮呵那。

For offenses involving Sanghabhasi, if concealed, they should perform Pravaranapah, Mana, or Aboard.

不覆者行摩那埵、阿浮呵那。

If not concealed, perform Mana or Aboard.

犯尼薩耆波夜提罪者，

Those who commit the Nissaggiya Pacittiya faults,

此長物應僧中捨已，

Should give up the excess possessions in the Sangha,

在長老比丘前，偏袒右肩胡跪合掌，

In front of an elder monk, they should bare the right shoulder, kneel with palms together,

作是言：「我長衣過十日，已眾僧中捨。」

Saying: "I have more than ten days' worth of robes, which I have renounced in the presence of the Sangha."

犯波夜提罪悔過。

Repent for the offense of Pacittiya.

前人問言：「汝見此罪不？」

The person in front will ask: "Do you acknowledge this offense?"

答言：「見。」

Reply: "Yes, I see."

語言：「莫更作。」

They will say: "Do not commit it again."

答言：「我頂戴持。」

Reply: "I accept and uphold."

乃至羯磨衣與一人，後應還。

Until the Karmavasa is given to one person, it should later be returned.

犯波夜提，乃至越毘尼罪亦如是悔

For the offense of Pacittiya, even for transgressions against Vinaya, repentance should be done similarly.




驅出者
Expulsion is

有七事
Due to seven causes:

壞尼淨行
Corrupting a nun's purity,

盜住
Stealing while living in the monastery,

越濟
Attempting unlawful crossing,

五逆
Committing the five heinous crimes,

不能男
Being impotent,

犯四波羅夷
Committing any of the four parajikas,

沙彌惡見
Holding pernicious views as a novice,

是名七事應驅出
These are the seven causes for expulsion.



異住者，佛住王舍城，如提婆達多因緣中廣說，乃至提婆達多走向伽耶城。
Once the Buddha resided in Rajagaha city, and as explained in the context of Devadatta, even until Devadatta went towards Gaya city.

佛於後向伽耶城，其日應布薩，佛語阿難：「汝去語提婆達多來，今日僧作布薩羯磨事。」
Later, the Buddha was heading towards Gaya city, it was the day for the Uposatha, and the Buddha said to Ananda: "You go and call Devadatta, today the Sangha is performing the Uposatha ritual."

阿難即往，作是言：「長老！今日僧作布薩羯磨，世尊喚提婆達多。」
Ananda immediately went and said: "Elder! Today the Sangha is performing the Uposatha ritual, the Blessed One is calling Devadatta."

答言：「我不去，從今日後不共佛法僧、不共布薩自恣羯磨，從今日後波羅提木叉，欲學、不學自從我意。」
He replied: "I will not go, from today onwards I will not associate with the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha, nor participate in the Uposatha or Pavarana rites, from today onwards the Patimokkha, to learn or not learn, is based on my own will."

阿難聞是語已作是念：「此是奇事！出是惡聲，將無壞僧耶？」
Ananda, after hearing this, thought: "Is this a wonder! Such a bad statement, will it not harm the Sangha?"

阿難還以上事具白世尊。
Ananda thus returned and reported the matter to the Blessed One.

佛語阿難：「汝更往提婆達多所。」
The Buddha said to Ananda: "You go again to where Devadatta is."

乃至阿難作是念：「奇事！出是惡聲，將無壞僧？」
Until Ananda thought: "What a wonder! Such a bad statement, will it not harm the Sangha?"

阿難還後，六群比丘自相謂言：「沙門瞿曇必當三遣使來，我等各各正意先作布薩事，我等作後世名譽。」
After Ananda returned, a group of six monks said among themselves: "The ascetic Gautama will definitely send messengers three times, we shall each concentrate and perform the Uposatha ceremony first, this will be our future reputation."

佛在世時，提婆達多、六群比丘共破僧，即布薩竟。
While the Buddha was alive, Devadatta and the group of six monks together caused a schism in the Sangha, thus the Uposatha was concluded.

阿難以是因緣具白世尊。
Ananda reported this incident to the Blessed One.

佛言：「汝更第三往語提婆達多來，今日僧作布薩羯磨。」
The Buddha said: "Go a third time to tell Devadatta, today the Sangha is performing the Uposatha rite."

阿難即往，作是言：「世尊喚！今日僧作布薩羯磨。」
Ananda immediately went and said: "The Blessed One is calling! Today the Sangha is performing the Uposatha rite."

答言：「我不去，自今日後不共佛法僧、不共布薩自恣羯磨。從今日後波羅提木叉毘尼，欲學、不學自從我意，但我等已作布薩竟。」
He replied: "I will not go, from today onwards I will not associate with the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha, nor participate in the Uposatha or Pavarana rites. From today onwards, the Patimokkha Vinaya, to learn or not, is up to my own wish, but we have already concluded the Uposatha."

阿難聞已，作是念：「奇哉！已壞僧竟。」
Ananda heard it and thought: "What a wonder! The Sangha has already been divided."

即還以上因緣具白世尊。
He then returned and reported the incident to the Blessed One.

世尊聞已，即說此偈：
The Blessed One, after hearing it, recited this verse:



清淨如月滿，
Pure as the full moon,

清淨得布薩；
Purity achieved through observance;



身口業清淨，
The actions of the body and speech are pure,

是乃應布薩。
this is how one should observe the Uposatha.




佛告阿難：「非法人已作布薩竟，如法人應作布薩。」

The Buddha told Ananda, "If non-dharma persons have completed the uposatha, then the dharma persons should perform the uposatha."

爾時提婆達多破僧，六群比丘破僧伴黨，是名異住。

At that time, Devadatta divided the sangha, and groups of six bhikkhus split from their fellow practitioners, which is called living differently.




摩訶僧祇律卷第二十六
Scroll Twenty-Six of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya




